List and briefly define the four main elements of a computer.
Define the two main categories of processor registers.
In general terms, what are the four distinct actions that a machine instruction can specify?
What is an interrupt?
How are multiple interrupts dealt with?
What characteristics distinguish the various elements of a memory hierarchy?
What is cache memory?
What is the difference between a multiprocessor and a multicore system?
What is the distinction between spatial locality and temporal locality?
In general, what are the strategies for exploiting spatial locality and temporal locality?
What are three objectives of an OS design?
What is the kernel of an OS?
What is multiprogramming?
What is a process?
How is the execution context of a process used by the OS?
List and briefly explain five storage management responsibilities of a typical OS.
Explain the distinction between a real address and a virtual address.
Describe the round-robin scheduling technique.
Explain the difference between a monolithic kernel and a microkernel.
What is multithreading?
List the key design issues for an SMP operating system.
What is an instruction trace?
What common events lead to the creation of a process?
For the processing model of Figure 3.6, briefly define each state.
What does it mean to preempt a process?
What is swapping and what is its purpose?
Why does Figure 3.9b have two blocked states?
List four characteristics of a suspended process.
For what types of entities does the OS maintain tables of information for management purposes?
List three general categories of information in a process control block.
Why are two modes (user and kernel) needed?
What are the steps performed by an OS to create a new process?
What is the difference between an interrupt and a trap?
Give three examples of an interrupt.
What is the difference between a mode switch and a process switch?
Table 3.5 lists typical elements found in a process control block for an unthreaded OS. Of these, which should belong to a thread control block and which should belong to a process control block for a multithreaded system?
List reasons why a mode switch between threads may be cheaper than a mode switch between processes.
What are the two separate and potentially independent characteristics embodied in the concept of process?
Give four general examples of the use of threads in a single-user multiprocessing sys- tem.
What resources are typically shared by all of the threads of a process?
List three advantages of ULTs over KLTs.
List two disadvantages of ULTs compared to KLTs.
Define jacketing.
List four design issues for which the concept of concurrency is relevant.
What are three contexts in which concurrency arises?
What is the basic requirement for the execution of concurrent processes?
List three degrees of awareness between processes and briefly define each.
What is the distinction between competing processes and cooperating processes?
List the three control problems associated with competing processes and briefly de- fine each.
List the requirements for mutual exclusion.
What operations can be performed on a semaphore?
Give examples of reusable and consumable resources.
What are the three conditions that must be present for deadlock to be possible?
What are the four conditions that create deadlock?
How can the hold-and-wait condition be prevented?
List two ways in which the no-preemption condition can be prevented.
How can the circular wait condition be prevented?
What is the difference among deadlock avoidance, detection, and prevention?
What requirements is memory management intended to satisfy?
Why is the capability to relocate processes desirable?
Why is it not possible to enforce memory protection at compile time?
What are some reasons to allow two or more processes to all have access to a particular region of memory?
In a fixed-partitioning scheme, what are the advantages of using unequal-size partitions?
What is the difference between internal and external fragmentation?
What are the distinctions among logical, relative, and physical addresses?
What is the difference between a page and a frame?
What is the difference between a page and a segment?
What is the difference between simple paging and virtual memory paging?
Explain thrashing.
Why is the principle of locality crucial to the use of virtual memory?
What elements are typically found in a page table entry? Briefly define each element.
What is the purpose of a translation lookaside buffer?
Briefly define the alternative page fetch policies.
What is the difference between resident set management and page replacement policy?
What is the relationship between FIFO and clock page replacement algorithms?
What is accomplished by page buffering?
Why is it not possible to combine a global replacement policy and a fixed allocation policy?
What is the difference between a resident set and a working set?
What is the difference between demand cleaning and precleaning?
Briefly describe the three types of processor scheduling.
What is usually the critical performance requirement in an interactive operating system?
What is the difference between turnaround time and response time?
For process scheduling, does a low-priority value represent a low priority or a high priority?
What is the difference between preemptive and nonpreemptive scheduling?
Briefly define FCFS scheduling.
Briefly define round-robin scheduling.
Briefly define shortest-process-next scheduling.
Briefly define shortest-remaining-time scheduling.
Briefly define highest-response-ratio-next scheduling.
Briefly define feedback scheduling.
List and briefly define five different categories of synchronization granularity.
List and briefly define four techniques for thread scheduling.
List and briefly define three versions of load sharing.
What is the difference between hard and soft real-time tasks?
What is the difference between periodic and aperiodic real-time tasks?
List and briefly define five general areas of requirements for a real-time operating system.
List and briefly define four classes of real-time scheduling algorithms.
What items of information about a task might be useful in real-time scheduling?
List and briefly define three techniques for performing I/O.
What is the difference between logical I/O and device I/O?
What is the difference between block-oriented devices and stream-oriented devices? Give a few examples of each.
Why would you expect improved performance using a double buffer rather than a single buffer for I/O?
What delay elements are involved in a disk read or write?
Briefly define the disk scheduling policies illustrated in Figure 11.7.
Briefly define the seven RAID levels.
What is the typical disk sector size?
What is the difference between a field and a record?
What is the difference between a file and a database?
What is a file management system?
What criteria are important in choosing a file organization?
List and briefly define five file organizations.
Why is the average search time to find a record in a file less for an indexed sequential file than for a sequential file?
What are typical operations that may be performed on a directory?
What is the relationship between a pathname and a working directory?
What are typical access rights that may be granted or denied to a particular user for a particular file?
List and briefly define three blocking methods.
List and briefly define three file allocation methods.
What is an embedded system?
What are some typical requirements or constraints on embedded systems?
What is an embedded OS?
What are some of the key characteristics of an embedded OS?
Explain the relative advantages and disadvantages of an embedded OS based on an existing commercial OS compared to a purpose-built embedded OS.
What are the principal objectives that guided the design of the eCos kernel?
In eCos, what is the difference between an interrupt service routine and a deferred service routine?
What concurrency mechanisms are available in eCos?
What is the target application for TinyOS?
What are the design goals for TinyOS?
What is a TinyOS component?
What software comprises the TinyOS operating system?
What is the default scheduling discipline for TinyOS?
Define computer security.
What are the fundamental requirements addressed by computer security?
What is the difference between passive and active security threats?
List and briefly define three classes of intruders.
List and briefly define three intruder behavior patterns.
What is the role of compression in the operation of a virus?
What is the role of encryption in the operation of a virus?
What are typical phases of operation of a virus or worm?
In general terms, how does a worm propagate?
What is the difference between a bot and a rootkit?
In general terms, what are four means of authenticating a user’s identity?
Explain the purpose of the salt in Figure 15.1.
Explain the difference between a simple memory card and a smart card.
List and briefly describe the principal physical characteristics used for biometric identification.
Briefly describe the difference between DAC and RBAC.
Explain the difference between anomaly intrusion detection and signature intrusion detection.
What is a digital immune system?
How does behavior-blocking software work?
Describe some worm countermeasures.
What types of programming languages are vulnerable to buffer overflows?
What are the two broad categories of defenses against buffer overflows?
List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be used when compiling new programs.
List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be implemented when running existing, vulnerable programs.
What is client/server computing?
What distinguishes client/server computing from any other form of distributed data processing?
What is the role of a communications architecture such as TCP/IP in a client/server environment?
Discuss the rationale for locating applications on the client, the server, or split between client and server.
What are fat clients and thin clients, and what are the differences in philosophy of the two approaches?
Suggest pros and cons for fat client and thin client strategies.
Explain the rationale behind the three-tier client/server architecture.
What is middleware?
Because we have standards such as TCP/IP, why is middleware needed?
List some benefits and disadvantages of blocking and nonblocking primitives for message passing.
List some benefits and disadvantages of nonpersistent and persistent binding for RPCs.
List some benefits and disadvantages of synchronous and asynchronous RPCs.
List and briefly define four different clustering methods.
