3(128.txt) Process Description and Control
    Define the term process and explain the relationship between processes and process control blocks.
    Explain the concept of a process state and discuss the state transitions the processes undergo.
    List and describe the purpose of the data structures and data structure elements used by an OS to manage processes.
    Assess the requirements for process control by the OS.
    Understand the issues involved in the execution of OS code.
    Assess the key security issues that relate to operating systems.
    Describe the process management scheme for UNIX SVR4.
4(179.txt) Threads
    Understand the distinction between process and thread.
    Describe the basic design issues for threads.
    Explain the difference between user-level threads and kernel-level threads.
    Describe the thread management facility in Windows 7.
    Describe the thread management facility in Solaris.
    Describe the thread management facility in Linux.
5(220.txt) PROCESSES AND Concurrency: Mutual Exclusion and Synchronization
    Discuss basic concepts related to concurrency, such as race conditions, OS concerns, and mutual exclusion requirements.
    Understand hardware approaches to supporting mutual exclusion.
    Define and explain semaphores.
    Define and explain monitors.
    Define and explain monitors.
    Explain the readers/writers problem.
6(280.txt) Concurrency: Deadlock and Starvation
    List and explain the conditions for deadlock.
    Define deadlock prevention and describe deadlock prevention strategies related to each of the conditions for deadlock.
    Explain the difference between deadlock prevention and deadlock avoidance.
    Understand two approaches to deadlock avoidance.
    Explain the fundamental difference in approach between deadlock detection and deadlock prevention or avoidance.
    Understand how an integrated deadlock strategy can be designed.
    Analyze the dining philosophers problem.
    Explain the concurrency and synchronization methods used in UNIX, Linux, Solaris, and Windows 7.
1(29.txt) Computer System Overview
    Describe the basic elements of a computer system and their interrelationship.
    Explain the steps taken by a processor to execute an instruction.
    Understand the concept of interrupts and how and why a processor uses interrupts.
    List and describe the levels of a typical computer memory hierarchy.
    Explain the basic characteristics of multiprocessor and multicore organizations.
    Discuss the concept of locality and analyze the performance of a multilevel memory hierarchy.
    Understand the operation of a stack and its use to support procedure call and return.
7(327.txt) Memory Management
    Discuss the principal requirements for memory management.
    Understand the reason for memory partitioning and explain the  various techniques that are used.
    Understand and explain the concept of paging.
    Understand and explain the concept of segmentation.
    Assess the relative advantages of paging and segmentation.
    Summarize key security issues related to memory management.
    Describe the concepts of loading and linking.
8(362.txt) Virtual Memory
    Define virtual memory.
    Describe the hardware and control structures that support virtual memory.
    Describe the various OS mechanisms used to implement virtual memory.
    Describe the virtual memory management mechanisms in UNIX, Linux, and Windows
9(417.txt) Uniprocessor Scheduling
    Explain the differences among long-, medium-, and short-term scheduling.
    Assess the performance of different scheduling policies.
    Understand the scheduling technique used in traditional UNIX.
10(452.txt) Multiprocessor and Real-Time Scheduling
    Understand the concept of thread granularity.
    Discuss the key design issues in multiprocessor thread scheduling and some of the key approaches to scheduling.
    Understand the requirements imposed by real-time scheduling.
    Explain the scheduling methods used in Linux, UNIX SVR4, and Windows 7.
11(496.txt) I/O Management and Disk Scheduling
    Summarize key categories of I/O devices on computers.
    Discuss the organization of the I/O function.
    Explain some of the key issues in the design of OS support for I/O.
    Analyze the performance implications of various I/O buffering alternatives.
    Understand the performance issues involved in magnetic disk access.
    Explain the concept of RAID and describe the various levels.
    Understand the performance implications of disk cache.
    Describe the I/O mechanisms in UNIX, Linux, and Windows 7.
12(542.txt) File Management
    Describe the basic concepts of files and file systems.
    Understand the principal techniques for file organization and access.
    Define B-trees.
    Explain file directories.
    Understand the requirements for file sharing.
    Understand the concept of record blocking.
    Describe the principal design issues for secondary storage management.
    Understand the design issues for file system security.
    Explain the OS file systems used in Linux, UNIX, and Windows 7.
13(595.txt) Embedded Operating Systems
    Explain the concept of embedded system.
    Understand the characteristics of embedded operating systems.
    Describe the architecture and key features of eCos.
    Describe the architecture and key features of TinyOS.
14(629.txt) CHARACTERISTICS OF Computer Security Threats
    List and explain the key concepts that comprise computer security.
    Understand the spectrum of computer security attacks.
    Distinguish among various types of intruder behavior patterns and under- stand the types of intrusion techniques used to breach computer security.
    Summarize the principal types of malicious software.
    Present an overview of viruses, including typical virus structure and typical virus behavior.
    Understand the security threat posed by worms.
    Understand the security threat posed by bots.
    Explain key aspects of rootkits.
15(661.txt) Computer Security Techniques
    Define and compare three methods of user authentication.
    Compare and contrast two methods of access control.
    Explain the basic principles and techniques of intrusion detection.
    Explain the basic principles and techniques of malware defense.
    Understand how to defend against buffer overflow attacks.
    Explain the file system used in Windows 7.
2(68.txt) Operating System Overview
    Summarize, at a top level, the key functions of an operating system (OS).
    Discuss the evolution of operating systems for early simple batch systems to modern complex systems.
    Give a brief explanation of each of the major achievements in OS research, as defined in Section 2.3.
    Discuss the key design areas that have been instrumental in the development of modern operating systems.
    Define and discuss virtual machines and virtualization
    Understand the OS design issues raised by the introduction of multiprocessor and multicore organization.
    Understand the basic structure of Windows 7.
    Describe the essential elements of a traditional UNIX system.
    Explain the new features found in modern UNIX systems.
    Discuss Linux and its relationship to UNIX.
16(699.txt) Distributed Processing, Client/Server, and Clusters
    Present a summary of the key aspects of client/server computing.
    Define service-oriented architecture.
    Understand the principle design issues for distributed message passing.
    Understand the principle design issues for remote procedure calls.
    Understand the principle design issues for clusters.
    Describe the cluster mechanisms in Windows 7 and Beowulf.
