Microsoft Windows Overview

     History
     The story of Windows begins with a very different OS, developed by Microsoft for
     the first IBM personal computer and referred to as MS-DOS. The initial version,
     MS-DOS 1.0, was released in August 1981. It consisted of 4000 lines of assem-
     bly language source code and ran in 8 Kbytes of memory using the Intel 8086
     microprocessor.
     The IBM PC was an important stage in a continuing revolution in computing
     that has expanded computing from the data center of the 1960s, to the departmental
     minicomputer of the 1970s, and to the desktop in the 1980s. The revolution has con-
     tinued with computing moving into the briefcase in the 1990s, and into our pockets
     during the most recent decade.
     Microsoft's initial OS ran a single application at a time, using a command line
     interface to control the system. It took a long time for Microsoft to develop a true
     GUI interface for the PC; on their third try they succeeded. The 16-bit Windows
     3.0 shipped in 1990 and instantly became successful, selling a million copies in six
     months. Windows 3.0 was implemented as a layer on top of MS-DOS and suffered
     from the limitations of that primitive system. Five years later, Microsoft shipped a
     32-bit version, Windows 95, which was also very successful and led to the develop-
     ment of additional versions: Windows 98 and Windows Me.
     Meanwhile, it had become clear to Microsoft that the MS-DOS platform could
     not sustain a truly modern OS. In 1989 Microsoft hired Dave Cutler, who had devel-
     oped the very successful RSX-11M and VAX/VMS operating systems at Digital
     Equipment Corporation. Cutler's charter was to develop a modern OS, which was
     portable to architectures other than the Intel x86 family, and yet compatible with
     the OS/2 system that Microsoft was jointly developing with IBM, as well as the port-
     able UNIX standard, POSIX. This system was christened NT (New Technology).
     The first version of Windows NT (3.1) was released in 1993, with the same GUI
     as Windows 3.1, the follow-on to Windows 3.0. However, NT 3.1 was a new 32-bit
     OS with the ability to support older DOS and Windows applications as well as pro-
     vide OS/2 support. Several versions of NT 3.x followed with support for additional
     hardware platforms. In 1996, Microsoft released NT 4.0 with the same user interface
     as Windows 95. In 2000, Microsoft introduced the next major upgrade of the NT OS:
     Windows 2000. The underlying Executive and Kernel architecture is fundamentally
     the same as in NT 3.1, but new features have been added. The emphasis in Windows
     2000 was the addition of services and functions to support distributed processing.
     The central element of Windows 2000's new features was Active Directory, which
     is a distributed directory service able to map names of arbitrary objects to any kind
     of information about those objects. Windows 2000 also added the plug-and-play
     and power-management facilities that were already in Windows 98, the successor to
     Windows 95. These features are particularly important for laptop computers.
     In 2001, a new desktop version of NT was released, known as Windows XP.
     The goal of Windows XP was to finally replace the versions of Windows based on
     MS-DOS with an OS based on NT. In 2007, Microsoft shipped Windows Vista for
     the desktop and a short time later, Windows Server 2008. In 2009, they shipped

Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2. Despite the difference in naming, the
client and server versions of these systems use many of the same files, but with addi-
tional features and capabilities enabled for servers.
Over the years, NT has attempted to support multiple processor architectures;
the Intel i860 was the original target for NT as well as the x86. Subsequently, NT
added support for the Digital Alpha architecture, the PowerPC, and the MIPS.
Later came the Intel IA64 (Itanium) and the 64-bit version of the x86, based on
the AMD64 processor architecture. Windows 7 supports only x86 and AMD64.
Windows Server 2008 R2 supports only AMD64 and IA64--but Microsoft has
announced that it will end support for IA64 in future releases. All the other proces-
sor architectures have failed in the market, and today only the x86, AMD64, and
ARM architectures are viable. Microsoft's support for ARM is limited to their
Windows CE OS, which runs on phones and handheld devices. Windows CE has
little relationship to the NT-based Windows that runs on slates, netbooks/laptops,
desktops, and servers.
Microsoft has announced that it is developing a version of NT that targets
cloud computing: Windows Azure. Azure includes a number of features that are
specific to the requirements of public and private clouds. Though it is closely related
to Windows Server, it does not share files in the same way that the Windows client
and server versions do.
The Modern OS
Modern operating systems, such as today's Windows and UNIX (with all its flavors
like Solaris, Linux, and MacOS X), must exploit the capabilities of all the billions
of transistors on each silicon chip. They must work with multiple 32-bit and 64-bit
CPUs, with adjunct GPUs, DSPs, and fixed function units. They must provide sup-
port for sophisticated input/output (multiple touch-sensitive displays, cameras,
microphones, biometric and other sensors) and handle a variety of data challenges
(streaming media, photos, scientific number crunching, search queries)--all while
giving a human being a responsive, real-time experience with the computing system.
To handle these requirements, the computer cannot be doing only one thing
at a time. Unlike the early days of the PC, when the OS ran a single application at
a time, hundreds of activities are taking place to provide the modern computing
experience. The OS can no longer just switch to the application and step away until
it is needed; it must aggressively manage the system and coordinate between all the
competing computations that are taking place often simultaneously on the multiple
CPUs, GPUs, and DSPs that may be present in a modern computing environment.
Thus all modern operating systems have multitasking capability, even though they
may be acting on behalf of only a single human being (called the user).
Windows is a sophisticated multitasking OS, designed to manage the com-
plexity of the modern computing environment, provide a rich platform for appli-
cation developers, and support a rich set of experiences for users. Like Solaris,
Windows is designed to have the features that enterprises need, while at the same
time Windows, like MacOS, provides the simplicity and ease-of-use that consumers
require. In the following sections we will present an overview of the fundamental
structure and capabilities of Windows.

    Architecture
    Figure 2.15 illustrates the overall structure of Windows 7; all releases of Windows
    based on NT have essentially the same structure at this level of detail.
    As with virtually all operating systems, Windows separates application-oriented
    software from the core OS software. The latter, which includes the Executive, the
    Kernel, device drivers, and the hardware abstraction layer, runs in kernel mode.
    Kernel mode software has access to system data and to the hardware. The remaining
    software, running in user mode, has limited access to system data.
    OPERATING SYSTEM ORGANIZATION                                                                     Windows has a highly modular architecture.
    Each system function is managed by just one component of the OS. The rest of the
    OS and all applications access that function through the responsible component using
    standard interfaces. Key system data can only be accessed through the appropriate
              System support                                            Service processes                                                                   Applications
                 processes
    Service control                                            SVChost.exe
              manager                                                                                                                              Task manager                                                                      Environment
              Lsass                                            Winmgmt.exe                                                                                                                                                           subsystems
                                                                                                                                                   Windows
    Winlogon                                                   Spooler                                                                             explorer                                                                          POSIX
    Session                                    Services.exe                                                                                        User
    manager                                                                                                                        application
                                                                                                                                   Subsytem DLLs                                                                                     Win32
                                                                                                               Ntdll.dll
    System                                                                             User mode
    threads
                                                                                       Kernel mode
                                                                                       System service dispatcher
                                               (Kernel-mode callable interfaces)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Win32 USER,
    I/O manager             File system cache                                                                  Security reference                                          manager (registry)                                               GDI
    Device                                     Object manager  manager  Plug-and-play  Power manager  monitor                      Virtual memory  threads  Processes and                      Configuration  call  Local procedure
    and file                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Graphics
    system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  drivers
    drivers
                                                                                                      Kernel
                                                               Hardware abstraction layer (HAL)
    Lsass = local security authentication server                                                                                   Colored area indicates Executive
    POSIX = portable operating system interface
    GDI = graphics device interface
    DLL = dynamic link libraries
    Figure 2.15  Windows and Windows Vista Architecture [RUSS11]

function. In principle, any module can be removed, upgraded, or replaced without
rewriting the entire system or its standard application program interfaces (APIs).
   The kernel-mode components of Windows are the following:
·  Executive: Contains the core OS services, such as memory management, pro-
   cess and thread management, security, I/O, and interprocess communication.
·  Kernel: Controls execution of the processors. The Kernel manages thread
   scheduling, process switching, exception and interrupt handling, and multi-
   processor synchronization. Unlike the rest of the Executive and the user level,
   the Kernel's own code does not run in threads.
·  Hardware abstraction layer (HAL): Maps between generic hardware com-
   mands and responses and those unique to a specific platform. It isolates
   the OS from platform-specific hardware differences. The HAL makes each
   computer's system bus, direct memory access (DMA) controller, inter-
   rupt controller, system timers, and memory controller look the same to the
   Executive and Kernel components. It also delivers the support needed for
   SMP, explained subsequently.
·  Device  drivers:  Dynamic    libraries  that  extend  the  functionality  of      the
   Executive. These include hardware device drivers that translate user I/O func-
   tion calls into specific hardware device I/O requests and software components
   for implementing file systems, network protocols, and any other system exten-
   sions that need to run in kernel mode.
·  Windowing and graphics system: Implements the GUI functions, such as deal-
   ing with windows, user interface controls, and drawing.
   The Windows Executive includes components for specific system functions
and provides an API for user-mode software. Following is a brief description of
each of the Executive modules:
·  I/O manager: Provides a framework through which I/O devices are accessible
   to applications, and is responsible for dispatching to the appropriate device
   drivers for further processing. The I/O manager implements all the Windows
   I/O APIs and enforces security and naming for devices, network protocols,
   and file systems (using the object manager). Windows I/O is discussed in
   Chapter 11.
·  Cache manager: Improves the performance of file-based I/O by causing
   recently referenced file data to reside in main memory for quick access, and
   deferring disk writes by holding the updates in memory for a short time before
   sending them to the disk in more efficient batches.
·  Object manager: Creates, manages, and deletes Windows Executive objects
   that are used to represent resources such as processes, threads, and synchroni-
   zation objects. It enforces uniform rules for retaining, naming, and setting the
   security of objects. The object manager also creates the entries in each proc-
   esses' handle table, which consist of access control information and a pointer
   to the object. Windows objects are discussed later in this section.
·  Plug-and-play manager: Determines which drivers are required to support a
   particular device and loads those drivers.

    ·  Power manager: Coordinates power management among various devices
       and can be configured to reduce power consumption by shutting down idle
       devices, putting the processor to sleep, and even writing all of memory to disk
       and shutting off power to the entire system.
    ·  Security reference monitor: Enforces access-validation and audit-generation
       rules. The Windows object-oriented model allows for a consistent and uni-
       form view of security, right down to the fundamental entities that make up the
       Executive. Thus, Windows uses the same routines for access validation and
       for audit checks for all protected objects, including files, processes, address
       spaces, and I/O devices. Windows security is discussed in Chapter 15.
    ·  Virtual memory manager: Manages virtual addresses, physical memory, and
       the paging files on disk. Controls the memory management hardware and data
       structures which map virtual addresses in the process's address space to physi-
       cal pages in the computer's memory. Windows virtual memory management is
       described in Chapter 8.
    ·  Process/thread manager: Creates, manages, and deletes process and thread
       objects. Windows process and thread management are described in Chapter 4.
    ·  Configuration manager: Responsible for implementing and managing the
       system registry, which is the repository for both system-wide and per-user
       settings of various parameters.
    ·  Advanced local procedure call (ALPC) facility: Implements an efficient cross-
       process procedure call mechanism for communication between local processes
       implementing services and subsystems. Similar to the remote procedure call
       (RPC) facility used for distributed processing.
    USER-MODE PROCESSES  Four basic types of user-mode processes are supported
    by Windows:
    ·  Special system processes: User-mode services needed to manage the system,
       such as the session manager, the authentication subsystem, the service man-
       ager, and the logon process.
    ·  Service processes: The printer spooler, the event logger, user-mode compo-
       nents that cooperate with device drivers, various network services, and many,
       many others. Services are used by both Microsoft and external software devel-
       opers to extend system functionality as they are the only way to run background
       user-mode activity on a Windows system.
    ·  Environment subsystems: Provide different OS personalities (environments).
       The supported subsystems are Win32 and POSIX. Each environment sub-
       system includes a subsystem process shared among all applications using the
       subsystem and dynamic link libraries (DLLs) that convert the user application
       calls to ALPC calls on the subsystem process, and/or native Windows calls.
    ·  User applications: Executables (EXEs) and DLLs that provide the functional-
       ity users run to make use of the system. EXEs and DLLs are generally targeted
       at a specific environment subsystem; although some of the programs that are
       provided as part of the OS use the native system interfaces (NT API). There is
       also support for running 32-bit programs on 64-bit systems.

   Windows is structured to support applications written for multiple OS personali-
ties. Windows provides this support using a common set of kernel mode components
that underlie the OS environment subsystems. The implementation of each environ-
ment subsystem includes a separate process, which contains the shared data structures,
privileges, and Executive object handles needed to implement a particular personal-
ity. The process is started by the Windows Session Manager when the first application
of that type is started. The subsystem process runs as a system user, so the Executive
will protect its address space from processes run by ordinary users.
   An environment subsystem provides a graphical or command-line user inter-
face that defines the look and feel of the OS for a user. In addition, each subsys-
tem provides the API for that particular environment. This means that applications
created for a particular operating environment need only be recompiled to run on
Windows. Because the OS interface that they see is the same as that for which they
were written, the source code does not need to be modified.
Client/Server Model
The Windows OS services, the environment subsystems, and the applications are
structured using the client/server computing model, which is a common model for
distributed computing and which is discussed in Part Six. This same architecture can
be adopted for use internally to a single system, as is the case with Windows.
   The native NT API is a set of kernel-based services which provide the core
abstractions used by the system, such as processes, threads, virtual memory, I/O,
and communication. Windows provides a far richer set of services by using the
client/server model to implement functionality in user-mode processes. Both the
environment subsystems and the Windows user-mode services are implemented as
processes that communicate with clients via RPC. Each server process waits for a
request from a client for one of its services (e.g., memory services, process creation
services, or networking services). A client, which can be an application program
or another server program, requests a service by sending a message. The message
is routed through the Executive to the appropriate server. The server performs
the requested operation and returns the results or status information by means of
another message, which is routed through the Executive back to the client.
   Advantages of a client/server architecture include the following:
·  It simplifies the Executive. It is possible to construct a variety of APIs im-
   plemented in user-mode servers without any conflicts or duplications in the
   Executive. New APIs can be added easily.
·  It improves reliability. Each new server runs outside of the kernel, with its
   own partition of memory, protected from other servers. A single server can
   fail without crashing or corrupting the rest of the OS.
·  It provides a uniform means for applications to communicate with services via
   RPCs without restricting flexibility. The message-passing process is hidden
   from the client applications by function stubs, which are small pieces of code
   which wrap the RPC call. When an application makes an API call to an envi-
   ronment subsystem or a service, the stub in the client application packages the
   parameters for the call and sends them as a message to the server process that
   implements the call.

    ·  It provides a suitable base for distributed computing. Typically, distributed
       computing makes use of a client/server model, with remote procedure calls
       implemented using distributed client and server modules and the exchange of
       messages between clients and servers. With Windows, a local server can pass
       a message on to a remote server for processing on behalf of local client appli-
       cations. Clients need not know whether a request is being serviced locally or
       remotely. Indeed, whether a request is serviced locally or remotely can change
       dynamically based on current load conditions and on dynamic configuration
       changes.
    Threads and SMP
    Two important characteristics of Windows are its support for threads and for
    symmetric multiprocessing (SMP), both of which were introduced in Section 2.4.
    [RUSS11] lists the following features of Windows that support threads and SMP:
    ·  OS routines can run on any available processor, and different routines can
       execute simultaneously on different processors.
    ·  Windows supports the use of multiple threads of execution within a single
       process. Multiple threads within the same process may execute on different
       processors simultaneously.
    ·  Server processes may use multiple threads to process requests from more than
       one client simultaneously.
    ·  Windows provides mechanisms for sharing data and resources between proc-
       esses and flexible interprocess communication capabilities.
    Windows Objects
    Though the core of Windows is written in C, the design principles followed draw
    heavily on the concepts of object-oriented design. This approach facilitates the shar-
    ing of resources and data among processes and the protection of resources from
    unauthorized access. Among the key object-oriented concepts used by Windows are
    the following:
    ·  Encapsulation: An object consists of one or more items of data, called
       attributes, and one or more procedures that may be performed on those data,
       called services. The only way to access the data in an object is by invoking one
       of the object's services. Thus, the data in the object can easily be protected
       from unauthorized use and from incorrect use (e.g., trying to execute a non-
       executable piece of data).
    ·  Object class and instance: An object class is a template that lists the attributes
       and services of an object and defines certain object characteristics. The OS can
       create specific instances of an object class as needed. For example, there is a
       single process object class and one process object for every currently active
       process. This approach simplifies object creation and management.
    ·  Inheritance: Although the implementation is hand coded, the Executive uses
       inheritance to extend object classes by adding new features. Every Executive

   class is based on a base class which specifies virtual methods that support
   creating, naming, securing, and deleting objects. Dispatcher objects are
   Executive objects that inherit the properties of an event object, so they can
   use common synchronization methods. Other specific object types, such as the
   device class, allow classes for specific devices to inherit from the base class,
   and add additional data and methods.
·  Polymorphism: Internally, Windows uses a common set of API functions to
   manipulate objects of any type; this is a feature of polymorphism, as defined
   in Appendix D. However, Windows is not completely polymorphic because
   there are many APIs that are specific to a single object type.
The reader unfamiliar with object-oriented concepts should review Appendix D.
   Not all entities in Windows are objects. Objects are used in cases where data
are intended for user mode access or when data access is shared or restricted.
Among the entities represented by objects are files, processes, threads, semaphores,
timers, and graphical windows. Windows creates and manages all types of objects in
a uniform way, via the object manager. The object manager is responsible for creat-
ing and destroying objects on behalf of applications and for granting access to an
object's services and data.
   Each object within the Executive, sometimes referred to as a kernel object
(to distinguish from user-level objects not of concern to the Executive), exists as
a memory block allocated by the kernel and is directly accessible only by kernel
mode components. Some elements of the data structure (e.g., object name, security
parameters, usage count) are common to all object types, while other elements are
specific to a particular object type (e.g., a thread object's priority). Because these
object data structures are in the part of each process's address space accessible only
by the kernel, it is impossible for an application to reference these data structures
and read or write them directly. Instead, applications manipulate objects indirectly
through the set of object manipulation functions supported by the Executive. When
an object is created, the application that requested the creation receives back a
handle for the object. In essence, a handle is an index into a per-process Executive
table containing a pointer to the referenced object. This handle can then be used
by any thread within the same process to invoke Win32 functions that work with
objects, or can be duplicated into other processes.
   Objects may have security information associated with them, in the form
of a Security Descriptor (SD). This security information can be used to restrict
access to the object based on contents of a token object which describes a par-
ticular user. For example, a process may create a named semaphore object with
the intent that only certain users should be able to open and use that semaphore.
The SD for the semaphore object can list those users that are allowed (or denied)
access to the semaphore object along with the sort of access permitted (read,
write, change, etc.).
   In Windows, objects may be either named or unnamed. When a process
creates an unnamed object, the object manager returns a handle to that object, and
the handle is the only way to refer to it. Handles can be inherited by child processes,
or duplicated between processes. Named objects are also given a name that other
unrelated processes can use to obtain a handle to the object. For example, if proc-

Table 2.4  Windows Kernel Control Objects
Asynchronous Procedure Call       Used to break into the execution of a specified thread and to cause a
                                  procedure to be called in a specified processor mode.
Deferred Procedure Call           Used to postpone interrupt processing to avoid delaying hardware inter-
                                  rupts. Also used to implement timers and interprocessor communication.
Interrupt                         Used to connect an interrupt source to an interrupt service routine by
                                  means of an entry in an Interrupt Dispatch Table (IDT). Each processor
                                  has an IDT that is used to dispatch interrupts that occur on that processor.
Process                           Represents the virtual address space and control information necessary
                                  for the execution of a set of thread objects. A process contains a pointer to
                                  an address map, a list of ready threads containing thread objects, a list of
                                  threads belonging to the process, the total accumulated time for all threads
                                  executing within the process, and a base priority.
Thread                            Represents thread objects, including scheduling priority and quantum, and
                                  which processors the thread may run on.
Profile                           Used to measure the distribution of run time within a block of code. Both
                                  user and system code can be profiled.
           ess A wishes to synchronize with process B, it could create a named event object
           and pass the name of the event to B. Process B could then open and use that event
           object. However, if A simply wished to use the event to synchronize two threads
           within itself, it would create an unnamed event object, because there is no need for
           other processes to be able to use that event.
              There are two categories of objects used by Windows for synchronizing the
           use of the processor:
           ·  Dispatcher objects: The subset of Executive objects which threads can wait on
              to control the dispatching and synchronization of thread-based system opera-
              tions. These are described in Chapter 6.
           ·  Control objects: Used by the Kernel component to manage the operation of
              the processor in areas not managed by normal thread scheduling. Table 2.4
              lists the Kernel control objects.
              Windows is not a full-blown object-oriented OS. It is not implemented in
           an object-oriented language. Data structures that reside completely within one
           Executive component are not represented as objects. Nevertheless, Windows illus-
           trates the power of object-oriented technology and represents the increasing trend
           toward the use of this technology in OS design.
           What Is New in Windows 7
           The core architecture of Windows has been very stable; however, at each release
           there are new features and improvements made even at the lower levels of the sys-
           tem. Many of the changes in Windows are not visible in the features themselves,
           but in the performance and stability of the system. These are due to changes in
           the engineering behind Windows. Other improvements are due to new features, or
           improvements to existing features:

·  Engineering improvements: The performance of hundreds of key scenarios,
   such as opening a file from the GUI, are tracked and continuously character-
   ized to identify and fix problems. The system is now built in layers which can
   be separately tested, improving modularity and reducing complexity.
·  Performance improvements: The amount of memory required has been
   reduced, both for clients and servers. The VMM is more aggressive about
   limiting the memory use of runaway processes (see Section 8.5). Background
   processes can arrange to start upon an event trigger, such as a plugging in a
   camera, rather than running continuously.
·  Reliability improvements: The user-mode heap is more tolerant of memory
   allocation errors by C/C++ programmers, such as continuing to use memory
   after it is freed. Programs that make such errors are detected and the heap
   allocation policies are modified for that program to defer freeing memory and
   avoid corruption of the program's data.
·  Energy efficiency: Many improvements have been made to the energy effi-
   ciency of Windows. On servers, unused processors can be "parked," reducing
   their energy use. All Windows systems are more efficient in how the timers
   work; avoiding timer interrupts and the associated background activity allows
   the processors to remain idle longer, which allows modern processors to con-
   sume less energy. Windows accomplishes this by coalescing timer interrupts
   into batches.
·  Security: Windows 7 builds on the security features in Windows Vista, which
   added integrity levels to the security model, provided BitLocker volume
   encryption (see Section 15.6), and limited privileged actions by ordinary users.
   BitLocker is now easier to set up and use, and privileged actions result in
   many fewer annoying GUI pop-ups.
·  Thread improvements: The most interesting Windows 7 changes were in the
   Kernel. The number of logical CPUs available on each system is growing
   dramatically. Previous versions of Windows limited the number of CPUs to
   64, because of the bitmasks used to represent values like processor affinity
   (see Section 4.4). Windows 7 can support hundreds of CPUs. To ensure that
   the performance of the system scaled with the number of CPUs, major
   improvements were made to the Kernel-scheduling code to break apart locks
   and reduce contention. As the number of available CPUs increase, new
   programming environments are being developed to support the finer-grain
   parallelism than is available with threads. Windows 7 supports a form of User-
   Mode Scheduling which separates the user-mode and kernel-mode portions
   of threads, allowing the user-mode portions to yield the CPU without enter-
   ing the Kernel scheduler. Finally, Windows Server 2008 R2 introduced
   Dynamic Fair Share Scheduling (DFSS) to allow multiuser servers to limit
   how much one user can interfere with another. DFSS keeps a user with
   20 running threads from getting twice as much processor time as a user with
   only 10 running threads.

