Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

Key Terms
batch processing                      multiprogramming                     round robin
batch system                          multitasking                         scheduling
execution context                     multithreading                       serial processing
interrupt                             nucleus                              symmetric multiprocessing
job                                   operating system                     task
job control language                  physical address                     thread
kernel                                privileged instruction               time sharing
memory management                     process                              time-sharing system
microkernel                           process state                        uniprogramming
monitor                               real address                         virtual address
monolithic kernel                     resident monitor                     virtual machine
multiprogrammed batch
     system
        Review Questions
             2.1  What are three objectives of an OS design?
             2.2  What is the kernel of an OS?
             2.3  What is multiprogramming?
             2.4  What is a process?
             2.5  How is the execution context of a process used by the OS?

     2.6   List and briefly explain five storage management responsibilities of a typical OS.
     2.7   Explain the distinction between a real address and a virtual address.
     2.8   Describe the round-robin scheduling technique.
     2.9   Explain the difference between a monolithic kernel and a microkernel.
     2.10  What is multithreading?
     2.11  List the key design issues for an SMP operating system.
     Problems
     2.1   Suppose that we have a multiprogrammed computer in which each job has identical
           characteristics. In one computation period, T, for a job, half the time is spent in I/O
           and the other half in processor activity. Each job runs for a total of N periods. Assume
           that a simple round-robin scheduling is used, and that I/O operations can overlap with
           processor operation. Define the following quantities:
           ·   Turnaround time = actual time to complete a job
           ·   Throughput = average number of jobs completed per time period T
           ·   Processor utilization = percentage of time that the processor is active (not waiting)
           Compute these quantities for one, two, and four simultaneous jobs, assuming that the
           period T is distributed in each of the following ways:
           a.  I/O first half, processor second half
           b.  I/O first and fourth quarters, processor second and third quarter
     2.2   An I/O-bound program is one that, if run alone, would spend more time waiting for
           I/O than using the processor. A processor-bound program is the opposite. Suppose a
           short-term scheduling algorithm favors those programs that have used little processor
           time in the recent past. Explain why this algorithm favors I/O-bound programs and
           yet does not permanently deny processor time to processor-bound programs.
     2.3   Contrast the scheduling policies you might use when trying to optimize a time-sharing
           system with those you would use to optimize a multiprogrammed batch system.
     2.4   What is the purpose of system calls, and how do system calls relate to the OS and to
           the concept of dual-mode (kernel-mode and user-mode) operation?
     2.5   In IBM's mainframe OS, OS/390, one of the major modules in the kernel is the System
           Resource Manager. This module is responsible for the allocation of resources among
           address spaces (processes). The SRM gives OS/390 a degree of sophistication unique
           among operating systems. No other mainframe OS, and certainly no other type of OS,
           can match the functions performed by SRM. The concept of resource includes proces-
           sor, real memory, and I/O channels. SRM accumulates statistics pertaining to utilization
           of processor, channel, and various key data structures. Its purpose is to provide optimum
           performance based on performance monitoring and analysis. The installation sets
           forth various performance objectives, and these serve as guidance to the SRM, which
           dynamically modifies installation and job performance characteristics based on system
           utilization. In turn, the SRM provides reports that enable the trained operator to refine
           the configuration and parameter settings to improve user service.
               This problem concerns one example of SRM activity. Real memory is divided
           into equal-sized blocks called frames, of which there may be many thousands. Each
           frame can hold a block of virtual memory referred to as a page. SRM receives control
           approximately 20 times per second and inspects each and every page frame. If the
           page has not been referenced or changed, a counter is incremented by 1. Over time,
           SRM averages these numbers to determine the average number of seconds that a
           page frame in the system goes untouched. What might be the purpose of this and what
           action might SRM take?
     2.6   A multiprocessor with eight processors has 20 attached tape drives. There is a large
           number of jobs submitted to the system that each require a maximum of four tape

drives to complete execution. Assume that each job starts running with only three
tape drives for a long period before requiring the fourth tape drive for a short period
toward the end of its operation. Also assume an endless supply of such jobs.
a.  Assume the scheduler in the OS will not start a job unless there are four tape
    drives available. When a job is started, four drives are assigned immediately and
    are not released until the job finishes. What is the maximum number of jobs that
    can be in progress at once? What are the maximum and minimum number of tape
    drives that may be left idle as a result of this policy?
b.  Suggest an alternative policy to improve tape drive utilization and at the same
    time avoid system deadlock. What is the maximum number of jobs that can be in
    progress at once? What are the bounds on the number of idling tape drives?

                                       CHAPTER
