Process Description and Control
                                       CHAPTER
PROCESS DESCRIPTION
AND CONTROL
     3.1   What Is a Process?
           Background
           Processes and Process Control Blocks
     3.2   Process States
           A Two-State Process Model
           The Creation and Termination of Processes
           A Five-State Model
           Suspended Processes
     3.3   Process Description
           Operating System Control Structures
           Process Control Structures
     3.4   Process Control
           Modes of Execution
           Process Creation
           Process Switching
     3.5   Execution of the Operating System
           Nonprocess Kernel
           Execution within User Processes
           Process-Based Operating System
     3.6   Security Issues
           System Access Threats
           Countermeasures
     3.7   UNIX SVR4 Process Management
           Process States
           Process Description
           Process Control
     3.8   Summary
     3.9   Recommended Reading
     3.10  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
106

   The concept of process is fundamental to the structure of modern
   computer operating systems. Its evolution in analyzing problems of
   synchronization, deadlock, and scheduling in operating systems has
   been a major intellectual contribution of computer science.
               WHAT CAN BE AUTOMATED?: THE COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
                                                  RESEARCH STUDY, MIT Press, 1980
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
     Define the term process and explain the relationship between processes and
      process control blocks.
     Explain the concept of a process state and discuss the state transitions the
      processes undergo.
     List and describe the purpose of the data structures and data structure
      elements used by an OS to manage processes.
     Assess the requirements for process control by the OS.
     Understand the issues involved in the execution of OS code.
     Assess the key security issues that relate to operating systems.
     Describe the process management scheme for UNIX SVR4.
All multiprogramming operating systems, from single-user systems such as Windows
for end users to mainframe systems such as IBM's mainframe operating system,
z/OS, which can support thousands of users, are built around the concept of the
process. Most requirements that the OS must meet can be expressed with reference
to processes:
     The OS must interleave the execution of multiple processes, to maximize pro-
      cessor utilization while providing reasonable response time.
     The OS must allocate resources to processes in conformance with a specific
      policy (e.g., certain functions or applications are of higher priority) while at
      the same time avoiding deadlock.1
     The OS may be required to support interprocess communication and user cre-
      ation of processes, both of which may aid in the structuring of applications.
      We begin with an examination of the way in which the OS represents and
controls processes. Then, the chapter discusses process states, which characterize
the behavior of processes. Then we look at the data structures that the OS uses to
manage processes. These include data structures to represent the state of each
1Deadlock is examined in Chapter 6. As a simple example, deadlock occurs if two processes need the
same two resources to continue and each has ownership of one. Unless some action is taken, each process
will wait indefinitely for the missing resource.

     process and data structures that record other characteristics of processes that the
     OS needs to achieve its objectives. Next, we look at the ways in which the OS uses
     these data structures to control process execution. Finally, we discuss process
     management in UNIX SVR4. Chapter 4 provides more modern examples of
     process management.
         This chapter occasionally refers to virtual memory. Much of the time, we can
     ignore this concept in dealing with processes, but at certain points in the discus-
     sion, virtual memory considerations are pertinent. Virtual memory is previewed in
     Chapter 2 and discussed in detail in Chapter 8. A set of animations that illustrate
     concepts in this chapter is available online. Click on the rotating globe at this book's
     Web site at WilliamStallings.com/OS/OS7e.html for access.
3.1  WHAT IS A PROCESS?
     Background
     Before defining the term process, it is useful to summarize some of the concepts
     introduced in Chapters 1 and 2:
     1.  A computer platform consists of a collection of hardware resources, such as
         the processor, main memory, I/O modules, timers, disk drives, and so on.
     2.  Computer applications are developed to perform some task. Typically, they
         accept input from the outside world, perform some processing, and generate
         output.
     3.  It is inefficient for applications to be written directly for a given hardware
         platform. The principal reasons for this are as follows:
         a. Numerous applications can be developed for the same platform. Thus, it
             makes sense to develop common routines for accessing the computer's
             resources.
         b. The processor itself provides only limited support for multiprogramming.
             Software is needed to manage the sharing of the processor and other
             resources by multiple applications at the same time.
         c.  When multiple applications are active at the same time, it is necessary to
             protect the data, I/O use, and other resource use of each application from
             the others.
     4.  The OS was developed to provide a convenient, feature-rich, secure, and con-
         sistent interface for applications to use. The OS is a layer of software between
         the applications and the computer hardware (Figure 2.1) that supports appli-
         cations and utilities.
     5.  We can think of the OS as providing a uniform, abstract representation of
         resources that can be requested and accessed by applications. Resources
         include main memory, network interfaces, file systems, and so on. Once the
         OS has created these resource abstractions for applications to use, it must
         also manage their use. For example, an OS may permit resource sharing and
         resource protection.
