What Is a Process?
     process and data structures that record other characteristics of processes that the
     OS needs to achieve its objectives. Next, we look at the ways in which the OS uses
     these data structures to control process execution. Finally, we discuss process
     management in UNIX SVR4. Chapter 4 provides more modern examples of
     process management.
         This chapter occasionally refers to virtual memory. Much of the time, we can
     ignore this concept in dealing with processes, but at certain points in the discus-
     sion, virtual memory considerations are pertinent. Virtual memory is previewed in
     Chapter 2 and discussed in detail in Chapter 8. A set of animations that illustrate
     concepts in this chapter is available online. Click on the rotating globe at this book's
     Web site at WilliamStallings.com/OS/OS7e.html for access.
3.1  WHAT IS A PROCESS?
     Background
     Before defining the term process, it is useful to summarize some of the concepts
     introduced in Chapters 1 and 2:
     1.  A computer platform consists of a collection of hardware resources, such as
         the processor, main memory, I/O modules, timers, disk drives, and so on.
     2.  Computer applications are developed to perform some task. Typically, they
         accept input from the outside world, perform some processing, and generate
         output.
     3.  It is inefficient for applications to be written directly for a given hardware
         platform. The principal reasons for this are as follows:
         a. Numerous applications can be developed for the same platform. Thus, it
             makes sense to develop common routines for accessing the computer's
             resources.
         b. The processor itself provides only limited support for multiprogramming.
             Software is needed to manage the sharing of the processor and other
             resources by multiple applications at the same time.
         c.  When multiple applications are active at the same time, it is necessary to
             protect the data, I/O use, and other resource use of each application from
             the others.
     4.  The OS was developed to provide a convenient, feature-rich, secure, and con-
         sistent interface for applications to use. The OS is a layer of software between
         the applications and the computer hardware (Figure 2.1) that supports appli-
         cations and utilities.
     5.  We can think of the OS as providing a uniform, abstract representation of
         resources that can be requested and accessed by applications. Resources
         include main memory, network interfaces, file systems, and so on. Once the
         OS has created these resource abstractions for applications to use, it must
         also manage their use. For example, an OS may permit resource sharing and
         resource protection.

   Now that we have the concepts of applications, system software, and resources,
we are in a position to discuss how the OS can, in an orderly fashion, manage the
execution of applications so that
  Resources are made available to multiple applications.
  The physical processor is switched among multiple applications             so  all  will
   appear to be progressing.
  The processor and I/O devices can be used efficiently.
   The approach taken by all modern operating systems is to rely on a model in
which the execution of an application corresponds to the existence of one or more
processes.
Processes and Process Control Blocks
Recall from Chapter 2 that we suggested several definitions of the term process,
including
  A program in execution
  An instance of a program running on a computer
  The entity that can be assigned to and executed on a processor
  A unit of activity characterized by the execution of a sequence of instructions,
   a current state, and an associated set of system resources
We can also think of a process as an entity that consists of a number of elements.
Two essential elements of a process are program code (which may be shared with
other processes that are executing the same program) and a set of data associated
with that code. Let us suppose that the processor begins to execute this program
code, and we refer to this executing entity as a process. At any given point in time,
while the program is executing, this process can be uniquely characterized by a
number of elements, including the following:
  Identifier: A unique identifier associated with this process, to distinguish it
   from all other processes.
  State: If the process is currently executing, it is in the running state.
  Priority: Priority level relative to other processes.
  Program counter: The address of the next instruction in the program to be
   executed.
  Memory pointers: Includes pointers to the program code and data associated
   with this process, plus any memory blocks shared with other processes.
  Context data: These are data that are present in registers in the processor
   while the process is executing.
  I/O status information: Includes outstanding I/O requests, I/O devices (e.g.,
   disk drives) assigned to this process, a list of files in use by the process, and
   so on.
  Accounting information: May include the amount of processor time and clock
   time used, time limits, account numbers, and so on.

                                Identifier
                                State
                                Priority
                                Program counter
                                Memory pointers
                                Context data
                                I/O status
                                information
                                Accounting
                                information
                    Figure 3.1  Simplified Process Control Block
     The information in the preceding list is stored in a data structure, typically
     called a process control block (Figure 3.1), that is created and managed by the OS.
     The significant point about the process control block is that it contains sufficient
     information so that it is possible to interrupt a running process and later resume
     execution as if the interruption had not occurred. The process control block is
     the key tool that enables the OS to support multiple processes and to provide for
     multiprocessing. When a process is interrupted, the current values of the program
     counter and the processor registers (context data) are saved in the appropriate fields
     of the corresponding process control block, and the state of the process is changed
     to some other value, such as blocked or ready (described subsequently). The OS is
     now free to put some other process in the running state. The program counter and
     context data for this process are loaded into the processor registers and this process
     now begins to execute.
     Thus, we can say that a process consists of program code and associated data
     plus a process control block. For a single-processor computer, at any given time, at
     most one process is executing and that process is in the running state.
3.2  PROCESS STATES
     As just discussed, for a program to be executed, a process, or task, is created for
     that program. From the processor's point of view, it executes instructions from its
     repertoire in some sequence dictated by the changing values in the program counter
