Process Description
3.3  PROCESS DESCRIPTION
     The OS controls events within the computer system. It schedules and dispatches
     processes for execution by the processor, allocates resources to processes, and
     responds to requests by user processes for basic services. Fundamentally, we can
     think of the OS as that entity that manages the use of system resources by processes.
     This concept is illustrated in Figure 3.10. In a multiprogramming environment,
     there are a number of processes (P1,..., Pn) that have been created and exist in
     virtual memory. Each process, during the course of its execution, needs access to
     certain system resources, including the processor, I/O devices, and main memory. In
     the figure, process P1 is running; at least part of the process is in main memory, and
     it has control of two I/O devices. Process P2 is also in main memory but is blocked
     waiting for an I/O device allocated to P1. Process Pn has been swapped out and is
     therefore suspended.
     We explore the details of the management of these resources by the OS
     on behalf of the processes in later chapters. Here we are concerned with a more
     fundamental question: What information does the OS need to control processes and
     manage resources for them?
     Operating System Control Structures
     If the OS is to manage processes and resources, it must have information about
     the current status of each process and resource. The universal approach to provid-
     ing this information is straightforward: The OS constructs and maintains tables of
     information about each entity that it is managing. A general idea of the scope of this
     effort is indicated in Figure 3.11, which shows four different types of tables main-
     tained by the OS: memory, I/O, file, and process. Although the details will differ
     from one OS to another, fundamentally, all operating systems maintain information
     in these four categories.
     Memory tables are used to keep track of both main (real) and second-
     ary (virtual) memory. Some of main memory is reserved for use by the OS; the
     remainder is available for use by processes. Processes are maintained on secondary
     memory using some sort of virtual memory or simple swapping mechanism. The
     memory tables must include the following information:
     · The allocation of main memory to processes
     · The allocation of secondary memory to processes
                  P1             P2                         Pn
                                                                    Virtual
                                                                    memory
                                                                    Computer
                                                                    resources
     Processor             I/O   I/O      I/O               Main
                                                            memory
     Figure 3.10  Processes and Resources (resource allocation at one snapshot in time)

                                                                            Process
                   Memory tables                                            image
                                                                            Process
        Memory                                                              1
        Devices    I/O tables
        Files
        Processes  File tables
                   Primary process table
                   Process 1
                   Process 2
                                                                            Process
                   Process 3                                                image
                                                                            Process
                                                                            n
                   Process n
Figure 3.11        General Structure of Operating System Control Tables
·  Any protection attributes of blocks of main or virtual memory, such as which
   processes may access certain shared memory regions
·  Any information needed to manage virtual memory
We examine the information structures for memory management in detail in Part
Three.
   I/O tables are used by the OS to manage the I/O devices and channels of the
computer system. At any given time, an I/O device may be available or assigned to a
particular process. If an I/O operation is in progress, the OS needs to know the status
of the I/O operation and the location in main memory being used as the source or
destination of the I/O transfer. I/O management is examined in Chapter 11.
   The OS may also maintain file tables. These tables provide information about
the existence of files, their location on secondary memory, their current status, and
other attributes. Much, if not all, of this information may be maintained and used by
a file management system, in which case the OS has little or no knowledge of files.
In other operating systems, much of the detail of file management is managed by
the OS itself. This topic is explored in Chapter 12.
   Finally, the OS must maintain process tables to manage processes. The
remainder of this section is devoted to an examination of the required process
tables. Before proceeding to this discussion, two additional points should be made.
First, although Figure 3.11 shows four distinct sets of tables, it should be clear that
these tables must be linked or cross-referenced in some fashion. Memory, I/O, and

           files are managed on behalf of processes, so there must be some reference to these
           resources, directly or indirectly, in the process tables. The files referred to in the file
           tables are accessible via an I/O device and will, at some times, be in main or virtual
           memory. The tables themselves must be accessible by the OS and therefore are sub-
           ject to memory management.
              Second, how does the OS know to create the tables in the first place? Clearly,
           the OS must have some knowledge of the basic environment, such as how much main
           memory exists, what are the I/O devices and what are their identifiers, and so on. This
           is an issue of configuration. That is, when the OS is initialized, it must have access to
           some configuration data that define the basic environment, and these data must be
           created outside the OS, with human assistance or by some autoconfiguration software.
           Process Control Structures
           Consider what the OS must know if it is to manage and control a process. First, it
           must know where the process is located; second, it must know the attributes of the
           process that are necessary for its management (e.g., process ID and process state).
           PROCESS LOCATION  Before we can deal with the questions of where a process is
           located or what its attributes are, we need to address an even more fundamental
           question: What is the physical manifestation of a process? At a minimum, a process
           must include a program or set of programs to be executed. Associated with these
           programs is a set of data locations for local and global variables and any defined
           constants. Thus, a process will consist of at least sufficient memory to hold the
           programs and data of that process. In addition, the execution of a program typically
           involves a stack (see Appendix P) that is used to keep track of procedure calls and
           parameter passing between procedures. Finally, each process has associated with it
           a number of attributes that are used by the OS for process control. Typically, the
           collection of attributes is referred to as a process control block.7 We can refer to this
           collection of program, data, stack, and attributes as the process image (Table 3.4).
              The location of a process image will depend on the memory management
           scheme being used. In the simplest case, the process image is maintained as a
Table 3.4  Typical Elements of a Process Image
User Data
The modifiable part of the user space. May include program data, a user stack area, and programs that may be
modified.
User Program
The program to be executed.
Stack
Each process has one or more last-in-first-out (LIFO) stacks associated with it. A stack is used to store param-
eters and calling addresses for procedure and system calls.
Process Control Block
Data needed by the OS to control the process (see Table 3.5).
           7Other commonly used names for this data structure are task control block, process descriptor, and task
           descriptor.

contiguous, or continuous, block of memory. This block is maintained in secondary
memory, usually disk. So that the OS can manage the process, at least a small portion
of its image must be maintained in main memory. To execute the process, the entire
process image must be loaded into main memory or at least virtual memory. Thus,
the OS needs to know the location of each process on disk and, for each such proc-
ess that is in main memory, the location of that process in main memory. We saw
a slightly more complex variation on this scheme with the CTSS OS, in Chapter 2.
With CTSS, when a process is swapped out, part of the process image may remain in
main memory. Thus, the OS must keep track of which portions of the image of each
process are still in main memory.
   Modern operating systems presume paging hardware that allows noncontigu-
ous physical memory to support partially resident processes.8 At any given time, a
portion of a process image may be in main memory, with the remainder in secondary
memory.9 Therefore, process tables maintained by the OS must show the location
of each page of each process image.
   Figure 3.11 depicts the structure of the location information in the follow-
ing way. There is a primary process table with one entry for each process. Each
entry contains, at least, a pointer to a process image. If the process image con-
tains multiple blocks, this information is contained directly in the primary process
table or is available by cross-reference to entries in memory tables. Of course,
this depiction is generic; a particular OS will have its own way of organizing the
location information.
PROCESS ATTRIBUTES       A sophisticated multiprogramming system requires a great
deal of information about each process. As was explained, this information can be
considered to reside in a process control block. Different systems will organize this
information in different ways, and several examples of this appear at the end of this
chapter and the next. For now, let us simply explore the type of information that
might be of use to an OS without considering in any detail how that information is
organized.
   Table 3.5 lists the typical categories of information required by the OS for each
process. You may be somewhat surprised at the quantity of information required.
As you gain a greater appreciation of the responsibilities of the OS, this list should
appear more reasonable.
   We can group the process control block information into three general
categories:
·  Process identification
·  Processor state information
·  Process control information
8A brief overview of the concepts of pages, segments, and virtual memory is provided in the subsection
on memory management in Section 2.3.
9This brief discussion slides over some details. In particular, in a system that uses virtual memory, all of
the process image for an active process is always in secondary memory. When a portion of the image is
loaded into main memory, it is copied rather than moved. Thus, the secondary memory retains a copy of
all segments and/or pages. However, if the main memory portion of the image is modified, the secondary
copy will be out of date until the main memory portion is copied back onto disk.

Table 3.5    Typical Elements of a Process Control Block
                                        Process Identification
Identifiers
Numeric identifiers that may be stored with the process control block include
· Identifier of this process
· Identifier of the process that created this process (parent process)
· User identifier
                                        Processor State Information
User-Visible Registers
A user-visible register is one that may be referenced by means of the machine language that the processor
executes while in user mode. Typically, there are from 8 to 32 of these registers, although some RISC
implementations have over 100.
Control and Status Registers
These are a variety of processor registers that are employed to control the operation of the processor. These
include
· Program counter: Contains the address of the next instruction to be fetched
· Condition codes: Result of the most recent arithmetic or logical operation (e.g., sign, zero, carry, equal, overflow)
· Status information: Includes interrupt enabled/disabled flags, execution mode
Stack Pointers
Each process has one or more last-in-first-out (LIFO) system stacks associated with it. A stack is used to store
parameters and calling addresses for procedure and system calls. The stack pointer points to the top of the stack.
                                        Process Control Information
Scheduling and State Information
This is information that is needed by the operating system to perform its scheduling function. Typical items of
information:
· Process state: Defines the readiness of the process to be scheduled for execution (e.g., running, ready, wait-
     ing, halted).
· Priority: One or more fields may be used to describe the scheduling priority of the process. In some systems,
     several values are required (e.g., default, current, highest-allowable).
· Scheduling-related information: This will depend on the scheduling algorithm used. Examples are the
     amount of time that the process has been waiting and the amount of time that the process executed the last
     time it was running.
· Event: Identity of event the process is awaiting before it can be resumed.
Data Structuring
A process may be linked to other process in a queue, ring, or some other structure. For example, all processes
in a waiting state for a particular priority level may be linked in a queue. A process may exhibit a parent­child
(creator­created) relationship with another process. The process control block may contain pointers to other
processes to support these structures.
Interprocess Communication
Various flags, signals, and messages may be associated with communication between two independent
processes. Some or all of this information may be maintained in the process control block.
Process Privileges
Processes are granted privileges in terms of the memory that may be accessed and the types of instructions
that may be executed. In addition, privileges may apply to the use of system utilities and services.
Memory Management
This section may include pointers to segment and/or page tables that describe the virtual memory assigned to
this process.
Resource Ownership and Utilization
Resources controlled by the process may be indicated, such as opened files. A history of utilization of the
processor or other resources may also be included; this information may be needed by the scheduler.

     With respect to process identification, in virtually all operating systems, each
process is assigned a unique numeric identifier, which may simply be an index into
the primary process table (Figure 3.11); otherwise there must be a mapping that
allows the OS to locate the appropriate tables based on the process identifier. This
identifier is useful in several ways. Many of the other tables controlled by the OS
may use process identifiers to cross-reference process tables. For example, the
memory tables may be organized so as to provide a map of main memory with an
indication of which process is assigned to each region. Similar references will appear
in I/O and file tables. When processes communicate with one another, the process
identifier informs the OS of the destination of a particular communication. When
processes are allowed to create other processes, identifiers indicate the parent and
descendents of each process.
     In addition to these process identifiers, a process may be assigned a user iden-
tifier that indicates the user responsible for the job.
     Processor state information consists of the contents of processor registers.
While a process is running, of course, the information is in the registers. When a
process is interrupted, all of this register information must be saved so that it can
be restored when the process resumes execution. The nature and number of regis-
ters involved depend on the design of the processor. Typically, the register set will
include user-visible registers, control and status registers, and stack pointers. These
are described in Chapter 1.
     Of particular note, all processor designs include a register or set of registers,
often known as the program status word (PSW), that contains status information.
The PSW typically contain condition codes plus other status information. A good
example of a processor status word is that on Intel x86 processors, referred to as the
EFLAGS register (shown in Figure 3.12 and Table 3.6). This structure is used by
any OS (including UNIX and Windows) running on an x86 processor.
     The third major category of information in the process control block can be
called, for want of a better name, process control information. This is the addi-
tional information needed by the OS to control and coordinate the various active
processes. The last part of Table 3.5 indicates the scope of this information. As
31                           21              16  15                                      0
                             I   V  V  A  V  R       N  IO  O  D  I  T  S  Z  A  P       C
                             D   I  I  C  M  F       T  PL  F  F  F  F  F  F  F  F       F
                                 P  F
ID    Identification flag                    DF  Direction flag
VIP   Virtual interrupt pending              IF   Interrupt enable flag
VIF   Virtual interrupt flag                 TF  Trap flag
AC    Alignment check                        SF  Sign flag
VM    Virtual 8086 mode                      ZF  Zero flag
RF    Resume flag                            AF  Auxiliary carry flag
NT    Nested task flag                       PF  Parity flag
IOPL  I/O privilege level                    CF  Carry flag
OF    Overflow flag
Figure 3.12  x86 EFLAGS Register

Table 3.6   Pentium EFLAGS Register Bits
                                                  Control Bits
AC (Alignment check)
Set if a word or doubleword is addressed on a nonword or non-doubleword boundary.
ID (Identification flag)
If this bit can be set and cleared, this processor supports the CPUID instruction. This instruction provides
information about the vendor, family, and model.
RF (Resume flag)
Allows the programmer to disable debug exceptions so that the instruction can be restarted after a debug
exception without immediately causing another debug exception.
IOPL (I/O privilege level)
When set, causes the processor to generate an exception on all accesses to I/O devices during protected mode
operation.
DF (Direction flag)
Determines whether string processing instructions increment or decrement the 16-bit half-registers SI and DI
(for 16-bit operations) or the 32-bit registers ESI and EDI (for 32-bit operations).
IF (Interrupt enable flag)
When set, the processor will recognize external interrupts.
TF (Trap flag)
When set, causes an interrupt after the execution of each instruction. This is used for debugging.
                                          Operating Mode Bits
NT (Nested task flag)
Indicates that the current task is nested within another task in protected mode operation.
VM (Virtual 8086 mode)
Allows the programmer to enable or disable virtual 8086 mode, which determines whether the processor runs
as an 8086 machine.
VIP (Virtual interrupt pending)
Used in virtual 8086 mode to indicate that one or more interrupts are awaiting service.
VIF (Virtual interrupt flag)
Used in virtual 8086 mode instead of IF.
                                          Condition Codes
AF (Auxiliary carry flag)
Represents carrying or borrowing between half-bytes of an 8-bit arithmetic or logic operation using the AL
register.
CF (Carry flag)
Indicates carrying out or borrowing into the leftmost bit position following an arithmetic operation. Also
modified by some of the shift and rotate operations.
OF (Overflow flag)
Indicates an arithmetic overflow after an addition or subtraction.
PF (Parity flag)
Parity of the result of an arithmetic or logic operation. 1 indicates even parity; 0 indicates odd parity.
SF (Sign flag)
Indicates the sign of the result of an arithmetic or logic operation.
ZF (Zero flag)
Indicates that the result of an arithmetic or logic operation is 0.

Process               Process                                     Process
identification        identification                              identification
Processor state       Processor state                             Processor state   Process
information           information                                 information       control
                                                                                    block
Process control       Process control                             Process control
information           information                                 information
User stack            User stack                                  User stack
Private user          Private user                                Private user
address space         address space                               address space
(programs, data)      (programs, data)                            (programs, data)
Shared address        Shared address                              Shared address
space                 space                                       space
Process 1             Process 2                                   Process n
Figure 3.13  User Processes in Virtual Memory
we examine the details of operating system functionality in succeeding chapters,
the need for the various items on this list should become clear.
Figure 3.13 suggests the structure of process images in virtual memory. Each
process image consists of a process control block, a user stack, the private address
space of the process, and any other address space that the process shares with
other processes. In the figure, each process image appears as a contiguous range
of addresses. In an actual implementation, this may not be the case; it will depend
on the memory management scheme and the way in which control structures are
organized by the OS.
As indicated in Table 3.5, the process control block may contain structuring
information, including pointers that allow the linking of process control blocks.
Thus, the queues that were described in the preceding section could be imple-
mented as linked lists of process control blocks. For example, the queueing structure
of Figure 3.8a could be implemented as suggested in Figure 3.14.
THE ROLE OF THE PROCESS CONTROL BLOCK               The process control block is the
most important data structure in an OS. Each process control block contains all
of the information about a process that is needed by the OS. The blocks are read
and/or modified by virtually every module in the OS, including those involved with
scheduling, resource allocation, interrupt processing, and performance monitoring
and analysis. One can say that the set of process control blocks defines the state of
the OS.
This brings up an important design issue. A number of routines within the OS
will need access to information in process control blocks. The provision of direct

                          Process
                          control block
        Running
        Ready
        Blocked
     Figure 3.14  Process List Structures
     access to these tables is not difficult. Each process is equipped with a unique ID, and
     this can be used as an index into a table of pointers to the process control blocks.
     The difficulty is not access but rather protection. Two problems present themselves:
     ·  A bug in a single routine, such as an interrupt handler, could damage process
        control blocks, which could destroy the system's ability to manage the affected
        processes.
     ·  A design change in the structure or semantics of the process control block
        could affect a number of modules in the OS.
        These problems can be addressed by requiring all routines in the OS to go
     through a handler routine, the only job of which is to protect process control blocks,
     and which is the sole arbiter for reading and writing these blocks. The trade-off in
     the use of such a routine involves performance issues and the degree to which the
     remainder of the system software can be trusted to be correct.
3.4  PROCESS CONTROL
     Modes of Execution
     Before continuing with our discussion of the way in which the OS manages pro-
     cesses, we need to distinguish between the mode of processor execution normally
     associated with the OS and that normally associated with user programs. Most
