 clustering can be structured asymmetrically or symmetrically. in asymmetric clustering one machine is in hot standby mode while the other is running the applications. the hot standby host machine does nothing but monitor the active server. if that server fails the hot standby host becomes the active server. in symmetric mode two or more hosts are running applications and are monitoring each other. this mode is obviously more efficient as it uses all of the available hardware. it does require that more than one application be available to run. other forms of clusters include parallel clusters and clustering over a wide area network wan as described in section . . parallel clusters allow multiple hosts to access the same data on the shared storage. because most operating systems lack support for simultaneous data access by multiple hosts parallel clusters are usually accomplished by use of special versions of software and special releases of applications. for example oracle parallel server is a version of oracle's database that has been designed to run on a parallel cluster. each machine runs oracle and a layer of software tracks access to the shared disk. each machine has full access to all data in the database. to provide this shared access to data the system must also supply access control and locking to ensure that no conflicting operations occur. this function commonly known as a distributed lock manager dlm is included in some cluster technology. cluster technology is changing rapidly. some cluster products support dozens of systems in a cluster as well as clustered nodes that are separated by miles. many of these improvements are made possible by storage area networks sans as described in section . . which allow many systems to attach to a pool of storage. if the applications and their data are stored on the san then the cluster software can assign the application to run on any host that is attached to the san. if the host fails then any other host can take over. in a database cluster dozens of hosts can share the same database greatlyincreasing performance and reliability. . operating system structure now that we have discussed basic information about computer system organization and architecture we are ready to talk about operating systems. an operating system provides the environment within which programs are executed. internally operating systems vary greatly in their makeup since they are organized along many different lines. there are however many commonalities which we consider in this section. one of the most important aspects of operating systems is the ability to multiprogram. a single user cannot in general keep either the cpu or the i o devices busy at all times. multiprogramming increases cpu utilization by organizing jobs code and data so that the cpu always has one to execute. the idea is as follows the operating system keeps several jobs in memory simultaneously figure . . this set of jobs can be a subset of the jobs kept in the job pool which contains all jobs that enter the system since the number of jobs that can be kept simultaneously in memory is usually smaller than the number of jobs that can be kept in the job pool. the operating system picks and begins to execute one of the jobs in memory. eventually the job may have to wait for some task such as an i o operation to complete. in a chapter introduction operating system job job job job m figure . memory layout for a multiprogramming system. non multiprogrammed system the cpu would sit idle. in a multiprogrammed system the operating system simply switches to and executes another job. when that job needs to wait the cpu is switched to another job and so on. eventually the first job finishes waiting and gets the cpu back. as long as at least one job needs to execute the cpu is never idle. this idea is common in other life situations. a lawyer does not work for only one client at a time for example. while one case is waiting to go to trial or have papers typed the lawyer can work on another case. if he has enough clients the lawyer will never be idle for lack of work. idle lawyers tend to become politicians so there is a certain social value in keeping lawyers busy. multiprogrammed systems provide an environment in which the various system resources for example cpu memory and peripheral devices are utilized effectively but they do not provide for user interaction with the computer system. time sharing or multitasking is a logical extension of multiprogramming. in time sharing systems the cpu executes multiple jobs by switching among them but the switches occur so frequently that the users can interact with each program while it is running. time sharing requires an interactive or hands on computer system which provides direct communication between the user and the system. the user gives instructions to the operating system or to a program directly using a input device such as a keyboard or a mouse and waits for immediate results on an output device. accordingly the response time should be short typically less than one second. a time shared operating system allows many users to share the computer simultaneously. since each action or command in a time shared system tends to be short only a little cpu time is needed for each user. as the system switches rapidly from one user to the next each user is given the impression that the entire computer system is dedicated to his use even though it is being shared among many users. a time shared operating system uses cpu scheduling and multiprogramming to provide each user with a small portion of a time shared computer. each user has at least one separate program in memory. a program loaded into