Process Control

     Modes of Execution
     Before continuing with our discussion of the way in which the OS manages pro-
     cesses, we need to distinguish between the mode of processor execution normally
     associated with the OS and that normally associated with user programs. Most

           processors support at least two modes of execution. Certain instructions can only
           be executed in the more-privileged mode. These would include reading or alter-
           ing a control register, such as the program status word; primitive I/O instructions;
           and instructions that relate to memory management. In addition, certain regions of
           memory can only be accessed in the more-privileged mode.
              The less-privileged mode is often referred to as the user mode, because user
           programs typically would execute in this mode. The more-privileged mode is referred
           to as the system mode, control mode, or kernel mode. This last term refers to the
           kernel of the OS, which is that portion of the OS that encompasses the important
           system functions. Table 3.7 lists the functions typically found in the kernel of an OS.
              The reason for using two modes should be clear. It is necessary to protect the
           OS and key operating system tables, such as process control blocks, from interfer-
           ence by user programs. In the kernel mode, the software has complete control of the
           processor and all its instructions, registers, and memory. This level of control is not
           necessary and for safety is not desirable for user programs.
              Two questions arise: How does the processor know in which mode it is to be
           executing and how is the mode changed? Regarding the first question, typically there
           is a bit in the program status word (PSW) that indicates the mode of execution. This
           bit is changed in response to certain events. Typically, when a user makes a call to
           an operating system service or when an interrupt triggers execution of an operating
           system routine, the mode is set to the kernel mode and, upon return from the service
           to the user process, the mode is set to user mode. As an example, consider the Intel
           Itanium processor, which implements the 64-bit IA-64 architecture. The processor
           has a processor status register (psr) that includes a 2-bit cpl (current privilege level)
           field. Level 0 is the most privileged level, while level 3 is the least privileged level.
           Most operating systems, such as Linux, use level 0 for the kernel and one other level
Table 3.7   Typical Functions of an Operating System Kernel
                                            Process Management
· Process creation and termination
· Process scheduling and dispatching
· Process switching
· Process synchronization and support for interprocess communication
· Management of process control blocks
                                            Memory Management
· Allocation of address space to processes
· Swapping
· Page and segment management
                                            I/O Management
· Buffer management
· Allocation of I/O channels and devices to processes
                                            Support Functions
· Interrupt handling
· Accounting
· Monitoring

     for user mode. When an interrupt occurs, the processor clears most of the bits in the
     psr, including the cpl field. This automatically sets the cpl to level 0. At the end of
     the interrupt-handling routine, the final instruction that is executed is irt (interrupt
     return). This instruction causes the processor to restore the psr of the interrupted pro-
     gram, which restores the privilege level of that program. A similar sequence occurs
     when an application places a system call. For the Itanium, an application places a
     system call by placing the system call identifier and the system call arguments in a
     predefined area and then executing a special instruction that has the effect of inter-
     rupting execution at the user level and transferring control to the kernel.
     Process Creation
     In Section 3.2, we discussed the events that lead to the creation of a new process.
     Having discussed the data structures associated with a process, we are now in a
     position to describe briefly the steps involved in actually creating the process.
         Once the OS decides, for whatever reason (Table 3.1), to create a new process,
     it can proceed as follows:
     1.  Assign a unique process identifier to the new process. At this time, a new entry
         is added to the primary process table, which contains one entry per process.
     2.  Allocate space for the process. This includes all elements of the process image.
         Thus, the OS must know how much space is needed for the private user address
         space (programs and data) and the user stack. These values can be assigned by
         default based on the type of process, or they can be set based on user request
         at job creation time. If a process is spawned by another process, the parent
         process can pass the needed values to the OS as part of the process-creation
         request. If any existing address space is to be shared by this new process, the
         appropriate linkages must be set up. Finally, space for a process control block
         must be allocated.
     3.  Initialize the process control block. The process identification portion contains
         the ID of this process plus other appropriate IDs, such as that of the parent
         process. The processor state information portion will typically be initialized
         with most entries zero, except for the program counter (set to the program
         entry point) and system stack pointers (set to define the process stack bound-
         aries). The process control information portion is initialized based on standard
         default values plus attributes that have been requested for this process. For
         example, the process state would typically be initialized to Ready or Ready/
         Suspend. The priority may be set by default to the lowest priority unless an
         explicit request is made for a higher priority. Initially, the process may own
         no resources (I/O devices, files) unless there is an explicit request for these or
         unless they are inherited from the parent.
     4.  Set the appropriate linkages. For example, if the OS maintains each schedul-
         ing queue as a linked list, then the new process must be put in the Ready or
         Ready/Suspend list.
     5.  Create or expand other data structures. For example, the OS may maintain
         an accounting file on each process to be used subsequently for billing and/or
         performance assessment purposes.

           Process Switching
           On the face of it, the function of process switching would seem to be straightforward.
           At some time, a running process is interrupted and the OS assigns another process
           to the Running state and turns control over to that process. However, several design
           issues are raised. First, what events trigger a process switch? Another issue is that
           we must recognize the distinction between mode switching and process switching.
           Finally, what must the OS do to the various data structures under its control to
           achieve a process switch?
           WHEN TO SWITCH PROCESSES   A process switch may occur any time that the OS has
           gained control from the currently running process. Table 3.8 suggests the possible
           events that may give control to the OS.
                 First, let us consider system interrupts. Actually, we can distinguish, as many
           systems do, two kinds of system interrupts, one of which is simply referred to as an
           interrupt, and the other as a trap. The former is due to some sort of event that is
           external to and independent of the currently running process, such as the completion
           of an I/O operation. The latter relates to an error or exception condition generated
           within the currently running process, such as an illegal file access attempt. With an
           ordinary interrupt, control is first transferred to an interrupt handler, which does
           some basic housekeeping and then branches to an OS routine that is concerned with
           the particular type of interrupt that has occurred. Examples include the following:
           ·     Clock interrupt: The OS determines whether the currently running process
                 has been executing for the maximum allowable unit of time, referred to as a
                 time slice. That is, a time slice is the maximum amount of time that a process
                 can execute before being interrupted. If so, this process must be switched to a
                 Ready state and another process dispatched.
           ·     I/O interrupt: The OS determines what I/O action has occurred. If the I/O
                 action constitutes an event for which one or more processes are waiting,
                 then the OS moves all of the corresponding blocked processes to the Ready
                 state (and Blocked/Suspend processes to the Ready/Suspend state). The OS
                 must then decide whether to resume execution of the process currently in
                 the Running state or to preempt that process for a higher-priority Ready
                 process.
           ·     Memory fault: The processor encounters a virtual memory address refer-
                 ence for a word that is not in main memory. The OS must bring in the block
Table 3.8  Mechanisms for Interrupting the Execution of a Process
Mechanism                  Cause                                   Use
Interrupt                  External to the execution of the        Reaction to an asynchronous external
                           current instruction                     event
Trap                       Associated with the execution of        Handling of an error or an exception
                           the current instruction                 condition
Supervisor call            Explicit request                        Call to an operating system function

         (page or segment) of memory containing the reference from secondary mem-
         ory to main memory. After the I/O request is issued to bring in the block of
         memory, the process with the memory fault is placed in a blocked state; the
         OS then performs a process switch to resume execution of another process.
         After the desired block is brought into memory, that process is placed in the
         Ready state.
         With a trap, the OS determines if the error or exception condition is fatal.
     If so, then the currently running process is moved to the Exit state and a proc-
     ess switch occurs. If not, then the action of the OS will depend on the nature of
     the error and the design of the OS. It may attempt some recovery procedure or
     simply notify the user. It may do a process switch or resume the currently running
     process.
         Finally, the OS may be activated by a supervisor call from the program being
     executed. For example, a user process is running and an instruction is executed that
     requests an I/O operation, such as a file open. This call results in a transfer to a
     routine that is part of the operating system code. The use of a system call may place
     the user process in the Blocked state.
     MODE SWITCHING    In Chapter 1, we discussed the inclusion of an interrupt stage as
     part of the instruction cycle. Recall that, in the interrupt stage, the processor checks
     to see if any interrupts are pending, indicated by the presence of an interrupt signal.
     If no interrupts are pending, the processor proceeds to the fetch stage and fetches
     the next instruction of the current program in the current process. If an interrupt is
     pending, the processor does the following:
     1.  It sets the program counter to the starting address of an interrupt handler
         program.
     2.  It switches from user mode to kernel mode so that the interrupt processing
         code may include privileged instructions.
     The processor now proceeds to the fetch stage and fetches the first instruction of
     the interrupt handler program, which will service the interrupt. At this point, typi-
     cally, the context of the process that has been interrupted is saved into that process
     control block of the interrupted program.
         One question that may now occur to you is, What constitutes the context that
     is saved? The answer is that it must include any information that may be altered by
     the execution of the interrupt handler and that will be needed to resume the pro-
     gram that was interrupted. Thus, the portion of the process control block that was
     referred to as processor state information must be saved. This includes the program
     counter, other processor registers, and stack information.
         Does anything else need to be done? That depends on what happens next. The
     interrupt handler is typically a short program that performs a few basic tasks related
     to an interrupt. For example, it resets the flag or indicator that signals the presence
     of an interrupt. It may send an acknowledgment to the entity that issued the inter-
     rupt, such as an I/O module. And it may do some basic housekeeping relating to the
     effects of the event that caused the interrupt. For example, if the interrupt relates
     to an I/O event, the interrupt handler will check for an error condition. If an error

has occurred, the interrupt handler may send a signal to the process that originally
requested the I/O operation. If the interrupt is by the clock, then the handler will
hand control over to the dispatcher, which will want to pass control to another proc-
ess because the time slice allotted to the currently running process has expired.
    What about the other information in the process control block? If this inter-
rupt is to be followed by a switch to another process, then some work will need to be
done. However, in most operating systems, the occurrence of an interrupt does not
necessarily mean a process switch. It is possible that, after the interrupt handler has
executed, the currently running process will resume execution. In that case, all that
is necessary is to save the processor state information when the interrupt occurs and
restore that information when control is returned to the program that was running.
Typically, the saving and restoring functions are performed in hardware.
CHANGE OF PROCESS STATE      It is clear, then, that the mode switch is a concept
distinct from that of the process switch.10 A mode switch may occur without
changing the state of the process that is currently in the Running state. In that case,
the context saving and subsequent restoral involve little overhead. However, if the
currently running process is to be moved to another state (Ready, Blocked, etc.),
then the OS must make substantial changes in its environment. The steps involved
in a full process switch are as follows:
1.  Save the context of the processor, including program counter and other
    registers.
2.  Update the process control block of the process that is currently in the
    Running state. This includes changing the state of the process to one of the
    other states (Ready; Blocked; Ready/Suspend; or Exit). Other relevant fields
    must also be updated, including the reason for leaving the Running state and
    accounting information.
3.  Move the process control block of this process to the appropriate queue
    (Ready; Blocked on Event i; Ready/Suspend).
4.  Select another process for execution; this topic is explored in Part Four.
5.  Update the process control block of the process selected. This includes chang-
    ing the state of this process to Running.
6.  Update memory management data structures. This may be required, depend-
    ing on how address translation is managed; this topic is explored in Part Three.
7.  Restore the context of the processor to that which existed at the time the
    selected process was last switched out of the Running state, by loading in the
    previous values of the program counter and other registers.
Thus, the process switch, which involves a state change, requires more effort than a
mode switch.
10The term context switch is often found in OS literature and textbooks. Unfortunately, although most of
the literature uses this term to mean what is here called a process switch, other sources use it to mean a
mode switch or even a thread switch (defined in the next chapter). To avoid ambiguity, the term is not
used in this book.

