Security Issues

     An OS associates a set of privileges with each process. These privileges dictate what
     resources the process may access, including regions of memory, files, privileged sys-
     tem instructions, and so on. Typically, a process that executes on behalf of a user
     has the privileges that the OS recognizes for that user. A system or utility process
     may have privileges assigned at configuration time.
        On a typical system, the highest level of privilege is referred to as administra-
     tor, supervisor, or root access.11 Root access provides access to all the functions and
     services of the operating system. With root access, a process has complete control of
     the system and can add or change programs and files, monitor other processes, send
     and receive network traffic, and alter privileges.
        A key security issue in the design of any OS is to prevent, or at least detect,
     attempts by a user or a piece of malicious software (malware) from gaining unau-
     thorized privileges on the system and, in particular, from gaining root access. In
     this section, we briefly summarize the threats and countermeasures related to this
     security issue. Part Seven provides more detail.
     System Access Threats
     System access threats fall into two general categories: intruders and malicious
     software.
     INTRUDERS  One of the most common threats to security is the intruder (the other
     is viruses), often referred to as a hacker or cracker. In an important early study of
     intrusion, Anderson [ANDE80] identified three classes of intruders:
       Masquerader: An individual who is not authorized to use the computer and
        who penetrates a system's access controls to exploit a legitimate user's account
       Misfeasor: A legitimate user who accesses data, programs, or resources for
        which such access is not authorized, or who is authorized for such access but
        misuses his or her privileges
       Clandestine user: An individual who seizes supervisory control of the system
        and uses this control to evade auditing and access controls or to suppress audit
        collection
     The masquerader is likely to be an outsider; the misfeasor generally is an insider;
     and the clandestine user can be either an outsider or an insider.
        Intruder attacks range from the benign to the serious. At the benign end of the
     scale, there are many people who simply wish to explore internets and see what is
     11On UNIX systems, the administrator, or superuser, account is called root; hence the term root access.

     out there. At the serious end are individuals who are attempting to read privileged
     data, perform unauthorized modifications to data, or disrupt the system.
        The objective of the intruder is to gain access to a system or to increase the
     range of privileges accessible on a system. Most initial attacks use system or soft-
     ware vulnerabilities that allow a user to execute code that opens a back door into
     the system. Intruders can get access to a system by exploiting attacks such as buffer
     overflows on a program that runs with certain privileges. We introduce buffer over-
     flow attacks in Chapter 7.
        Alternatively, the intruder attempts to acquire information that should have
     been protected. In some cases, this information is in the form of a user password.
     With knowledge of some other user's password, an intruder can log in to a system
     and exercise all the privileges accorded to the legitimate user.
     MALICIOUS SOFTWARE          Perhaps the most sophisticated types of threats to computer
     systems are presented by programs that exploit vulnerabilities in computing systems.
     Such threats are referred to as malicious software, or malware. In this context, we
     are concerned with threats to application programs as well as utility programs, such
     as editors and compilers, and kernel-level programs.
        Malicious software can be divided into two categories: those that need a host
     program, and those that are independent. The former, referred to as parasitic, are
     essentially fragments of programs that cannot exist independently of some actual
     application program, utility, or system program. Viruses, logic bombs, and back-
     doors are examples. The latter are self-contained programs that can be scheduled
     and run by the operating system. Worms and bot programs are examples.
        We can also differentiate between those software threats that do not replicate
     and those that do. The former are programs or fragments of programs that are acti-
     vated by a trigger. Examples are logic bombs, backdoors, and bot programs. The
     latter consists of either a program fragment or an independent program that, when
     executed, may produce one or more copies of itself to be activated later on the same
     system or some other system. Viruses and worms are examples.
        Malicious software can be relatively harmless or may perform one or more of
     a number of harmful actions, including destroying files and data in main memory,
     bypassing controls to gain privileged access, and providing a means for intruders to
     bypass access controls.
     Countermeasures
     INTRUSION DETECTION         RFC 2828 (Internet Security Glossary) defines intrusion
     detection as follows: A security service that monitors and analyzes system events
     for the purpose of finding, and providing real-time or near real-time warning of,
     attempts to access system resources in an unauthorized manner.
        Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can be classified as follows:
       Host-based IDS: Monitors the characteristics of a single host and the events
        occurring within that host for suspicious activity
       Network-based IDS: Monitors network traffic for particular network seg-
        ments or devices and analyzes network, transport, and application protocols
        to identify suspicious activity

   An IDS comprises three logical components:
  Sensors: Sensors are responsible for collecting data. The input for a sensor
   may be any part of a system that could contain evidence of an intrusion. Types
   of input to a sensor include network packets, log files, and system call traces.
   Sensors collect and forward this information to the analyzer.
  Analyzers: Analyzers receive input from one or more sensors or from other
   analyzers. The analyzer is responsible for determining if an intrusion has
   occurred. The output of this component is an indication that an intrusion has
   occurred. The output may include evidence supporting the conclusion that an
   intrusion occurred. The analyzer may provide guidance about what actions to
   take as a result of the intrusion.
  User interface: The user interface to an IDS enables a user to view output
   from the system or control the behavior of the system. In some systems, the
   user interface may equate to a manager, director, or console component.
   Intrusion detection systems are typically designed to detect human intruder
behavior as well as malicious software behavior.
AUTHENTICATION  In most computer security contexts, user authentication is the
fundamental building block and the primary line of defense. User authentication
is the basis for most types of access control and for user accountability. RFC 2828
defines user authentication as follows:
The process of verifying an identity claimed by or for a system entity. An authen-
tication process consists of two steps:
 Identification step: Presenting an identifier to the security system. (Identifiers
   should be assigned carefully, because authenticated identities are the basis
   for other security services, such as access control service.)
 Verification step: Presenting or generating authentication information that
   corroborates the binding between the entity and the identifier.
   For example, user Alice Toklas could have the user identifier ABTOKLAS.
This information needs to be stored on any server or computer system that Alice
wishes to use and could be known to system administrators and other users. A typical
item of authentication information associated with this user ID is a password, which
is kept secret (known only to Alice and to the system). If no one is able to obtain
or guess Alice's password, then the combination of Alice's user ID and password
enables administrators to set up Alice's access permissions and audit her activity.
Because Alice's ID is not secret, system users can send her e-mail, but because her
password is secret, no one can pretend to be Alice.
   In essence, identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed
identity to the system; user authentication is the means of establishing the validity
of the claim.

        There are four general means of authenticating a user's identity, which can be
     used alone or in combination:
       Something the individual knows: Examples include a password, a personal
        identification number (PIN), or answers to a prearranged set of questions.
       Something the individual possesses: Examples include electronic keycards,
        smart cards, and physical keys. This type of authenticator is referred to as a
        token.
       Something the individual is (static biometrics): Examples include recognition
        by fingerprint, retina, and face.
       Something the individual does (dynamic biometrics): Examples include recog-
        nition by voice pattern, handwriting characteristics, and typing rhythm.
        All of these methods, properly implemented and used, can provide secure user
     authentication. However, each method has problems. An adversary may be able to
     guess or steal a password. Similarly, an adversary may be able to forge or steal a
     token. A user may forget a password or lose a token. Further, there is a significant
     administrative overhead for managing password and token information on systems
     and securing such information on systems. With respect to biometric authenticators,
     there are a variety of problems, including dealing with false positives and false nega-
     tives, user acceptance, cost, and convenience.
     ACCESS CONTROL  Access control implements a security policy that specifies who
     or what (e.g., in the case of a process) may have access to each specific system
     resource and the type of access that is permitted in each instance.
        An access control mechanism mediates between a user (or a process executing
     on behalf of a user) and system resources, such as applications, operating systems,
     firewalls, routers, files, and databases. The system must first authenticate a user
     seeking access. Typically, the authentication function determines whether the user
     is permitted to access the system at all. Then the access control function determines
     if the specific requested access by this user is permitted. A security administrator
     maintains an authorization database that specifies what type of access to which
     resources is allowed for this user. The access control function consults this database
     to determine whether to grant access. An auditing function monitors and keeps a
     record of user accesses to system resources.
     FIREWALLS  Firewalls can be an effective means of protecting a local system or
     network of systems from network-based security threats while at the same time
     affording access to the outside world via wide area networks and the Internet.
     Traditionally, a firewall is a dedicated computer that interfaces with computers
     outside a network and has special security precautions built into it in order to
     protect sensitive files on computers within the network. It is used to service outside
     network, especially Internet, connections and dial-in lines. Personal firewalls that
     are implemented in hardware or software, and associated with a single workstation
     or PC, are also common.

                [BELL94] lists the following design goals for a firewall:
           1.   All traffic from inside to outside, and vice versa, must pass through the fire-
                wall. This is achieved by physically blocking all access to the local network
                except via the firewall. Various configurations are possible, as explained later
                in this chapter.
           2.   Only authorized traffic, as defined by the local security policy, will be allowed
                to pass. Various types of firewalls are used, which implement various types of
                security policies.
           3.   The firewall itself is immune to penetration. This implies the use of a hard-
                ened system with a secured operating system. Trusted computer systems are
                suitable for hosting a firewall and often required in government applications.
