UNIX SVR4 Process Management

           UNIX System V makes use of a simple but powerful process facility that is highly
           visible to the user. UNIX follows the model of Figure 3.15b, in which most of the OS
           executes within the environment of a user process. UNIX uses two categories of pro-
           cesses: system processes and user processes. System processes run in kernel mode and
           execute operating system code to perform administrative and housekeeping func-
           tions, such as allocation of memory and process swapping. User processes operate
           in user mode to execute user programs and utilities and in kernel mode to execute
           instructions that belong to the kernel. A user process enters kernel mode by issuing a
           system call, when an exception (fault) is generated, or when an interrupt occurs.
           Process States
           A total of nine process states are recognized by the UNIX SVR4 operating system;
           these are listed in Table 3.9 and a state transition diagram is shown in Figure 3.17
Table 3.9  UNIX Process States
User Running       Executing in user mode.
Kernel Running     Executing in kernel mode.
Ready to Run, in   Ready to run as soon as the kernel schedules it.
Memory
Asleep in Memory   Unable to execute until an event occurs; process is in main memory (a blocked state).
Ready to Run,      Process is ready to run, but the swapper must swap the process into main memory
Swapped            before the kernel can schedule it to execute.
Sleeping, Swapped  The process is awaiting an event and has been swapped to secondary storage (a
                   blocked state).
Preempted          Process is returning from kernel to user mode, but the kernel preempts it and does a
                   process switch to schedule another process.
Created            Process is newly created and not yet ready to run.
Zombie             Process no longer exists, but it leaves a record for its parent process to collect.

                                                                         Fork
                                                                         Created
                                    Preempted
              Return                                       Enough                  Not enough memory
              to User                                      memory                  (swapping system only)
     User                           Preempt
     running                                                             Swap out
                            Return             Reschedule  Ready to run            Ready to run
                                               process     in memory     Swap in   swapped
              System call,
              interrupt             Kernel
                                    running
                 Interrupt,                    Sleep       Wakeup                  Wakeup
              interrupt return      Exit
                                                           Asleep in     Swap out  Sleep,
                                    Zombie                 memory                  swapped
Figure 3.17      UNIX Process State Transition Diagram
     (based on figure in [BACH86]). This figure is similar to Figure 3.9b, with the two
     UNIX sleeping states corresponding to the two blocked states. The differences are
     as follows:
                UNIX employs two Running states to indicate whether the process is execut-
                 ing in user mode or kernel mode.
                A distinction is made between the two states: (Ready to Run, in Memory) and
                 (Preempted). These are essentially the same state, as indicated by the dotted
                 line joining them. The distinction is made to emphasize the way in which the
                 preempted state is entered. When a process is running in kernel mode (as a
                 result of a supervisor call, clock interrupt, or I/O interrupt), there will come
                 a time when the kernel has completed its work and is ready to return control
                 to the user program. At this point, the kernel may decide to preempt the cur-
                 rent process in favor of one that is ready and of higher priority. In that case,
                 the current process moves to the preempted state. However, for purposes of
                 dispatching, those processes in the Preempted state and those in the (Ready to
                 Run, in Memory) state form one queue.
                 Preemption can only occur when a process is about to move from kernel mode
     to user mode. While a process is running in kernel mode, it may not be preempted.
     This makes UNIX unsuitable for real-time processing. Chapter 10 discusses the
     requirements for real-time processing.

                  Two processes are unique in UNIX. Process 0 is a special process that is cre-
           ated when the system boots; in effect, it is predefined as a data structure loaded
           at boot time. It is the swapper process. In addition, process 0 spawns process 1,
           referred to as the init process; all other processes in the system have process 1 as
           an ancestor. When a new interactive user logs on to the system, it is process 1 that
           creates a user process for that user. Subsequently, the user process can create child
           processes in a branching tree, so that any particular application can consist of a
           number of related processes.
           Process Description
           A process in UNIX is a rather complex set of data structures that provide the OS
           with all of the information necessary to manage and dispatch processes. Table 3.10
           summarizes the elements of the process image, which are organized into three parts:
           user-level context, register context, and system-level context.
                  The user-level context contains the basic elements of a user's program and
           can be generated directly from a compiled object file. The user's program is sepa-
           rated into text and data areas; the text area is read-only and is intended to hold
           the program's instructions. While the process is executing, the processor uses the
           user stack area for procedure calls and returns and parameter passing. The shared
           memory area is a data area that is shared with other processes. There is only one
           physical copy of a shared memory area, but, by the use of virtual memory, it appears
Table 3.10    UNIX   Process Image
                                         User-Level Context
Process text         Executable machine instructions of the program
Process data         Data accessible by the program of this process
User stack           Contains the arguments, local variables, and pointers for functions executing in user mode
Shared memory        Memory shared with other processes, used for interprocess communication
                                             Register Context
Program counter      Address of next instruction to be executed; may be in kernel or user memory space of
                     this process
Processor status     Contains the hardware status at the time of preemption; contents and format are hard-
register             ware dependent
Stack pointer        Points to the top of the kernel or user stack, depending on the mode of operation at
                     the time or preemption
General-purpose      Hardware dependent
registers
                                         System-Level Context
Process table entry  Defines state of a process; this information is always accessible to the operating system
U (user) area        Process control information that needs to be accessed only in the context of the process
Per process region   Defines the mapping from virtual to physical addresses; also contains a permission
table                field that indicates the type of access allowed the process: read-only, read-write, or
                     read-execute
Kernel stack         Contains the stack frame of kernel procedures as the process executes in kernel mode

Table 3.11    UNIX Process Table Entry
Process status  Current state of process.
Pointers        To U area and process memory area (text, data, stack).
Process size    Enables the operating system to know how much space to allocate the process.
User            The real user ID identifies the user who is responsible for the running process. The effective
identifiers     user ID may be used by a process to gain temporary privileges associated with a particular
                program; while that program is being executed as part of the process, the process operates
                with the effective user ID.
Process         ID of this process; ID of parent process. These are set up when the process enters the
identifiers     Created state during the fork system call.
Event           Valid when a process is in a sleeping state; when the event occurs, the process is transferred
descriptor      to a ready-to-run state.
Priority        Used for process scheduling.
Signal          Enumerates signals sent to a process but not yet handled.
Timers          Include process execution time, kernel resource utilization, and user-set timer used to send
                alarm signal to a process.
P_link          Pointer to the next link in the ready queue (valid if process is ready to execute).
Memory          Indicates whether process image is in main memory or swapped out. If it is in memory,
status          this field also indicates whether it may be swapped out or is temporarily locked into main
                memory.
          to each sharing process that the shared memory region is in its address space. When
          a process is not running, the processor status information is stored in the register
          context area.
                The system-level context contains the remaining information that the OS
          needs to manage the process. It consists of a static part, which is fixed in size and
          stays with a process throughout its lifetime, and a dynamic part, which varies in
          size through the life of the process. One element of the static part is the process
          table entry. This is actually part of the process table maintained by the OS, with
          one entry per process. The process table entry contains process control information
          that is accessible to the kernel at all times; hence, in a virtual memory system, all
          process table entries are maintained in main memory. Table 3.11 lists the contents
          of a process table entry. The user area, or U area, contains additional process con-
          trol information that is needed by the kernel when it is executing in the context of
          this process; it is also used when paging processes to and from memory. Table 3.12
          shows the contents of this table.
                The distinction between the process table entry and the U area reflects the
          fact that the UNIX kernel always executes in the context of some process. Much
          of the time, the kernel will be dealing with the concerns of that process. However,
          some of the time, such as when the kernel is performing a scheduling algorithm
          preparatory to dispatching another process, it will need access to information about
          other processes. The information in a process table can be accessed when the given
          process is not the current one.
                The third static portion of the system-level context is the per process region
          table, which is used by the memory management system. Finally, the kernel stack is

Table 3.12    UNIX  U Area
Process table       Indicates entry that corresponds to the U area.
pointer
User identifiers    Real and effective user IDs. Used to determine user privileges.
Timers              Record time that the process (and its descendants) spent executing in user mode and in
                    kernel mode.
Signal-handler      For each type of signal defined in the system, indicates how the process will react to
array               receipt of that signal (exit, ignore, execute specified user function).
Control terminal    Indicates login terminal for this process, if one exists.
Error field         Records errors encountered during a system call.
Return value        Contains the result of system calls.
I/O parameters      Describe the amount of data to transfer, the address of the source (or target) data array
                    in user space, and file offsets for I/O.
File parameters     Current directory and current root describe the file system environment of the process.
User file           Records the files the process has opened.
descriptor table
Limit fields        Restrict the size of the process and the size of a file it can write.
Permission modes    Mask mode settings on files the process creates.
fields
           the dynamic portion of the system-level context. This stack is used when the process
           is executing in kernel mode and contains the information that must be saved and
           restored as procedure calls and interrupts occur.
           Process Control
           Process creation in UNIX is made by means of the kernel system call, fork( ). When
           a process issues a fork request, the OS performs the following functions [BACH86]:
              1.  It allocates a slot in the process table for the new process.
              2.  It assigns a unique process ID to the child process.
              3.  It makes a copy of the process image of the parent, with the exception of any
                  shared memory.
              4.  It increments counters for any files owned by the parent, to reflect that an
                  additional process now also owns those files.
              5.  It assigns the child process to the Ready to Run state.
              6.  It returns the ID number of the child to the parent process, and a 0 value to
                  the child process.
                  All of this work is accomplished in kernel mode in the parent process. When
           the kernel has completed these functions it can do one of the following, as part of
           the dispatcher routine:
                Stay in the parent process. Control returns to user mode at the point of the
                  fork call of the parent.

       Transfer control to the child process. The child process begins executing
        at the same point in the code as the parent, namely at the return from the
        fork call.
       Transfer control to another process. Both parent and child are left in the
        Ready to Run state.
        It is perhaps difficult to visualize this method of process creation because both
     parent and child are executing the same passage of code. The difference is this:
     When the return from the fork occurs, the return parameter is tested. If the value is
     zero, then this is the child process, and a branch can be executed to the appropriate
     user program to continue execution. If the value is nonzero, then this is the parent
     process, and the main line of execution can continue.
