Windows 7 Thread and SMP Management

     Windows process design is driven by the need to provide support for a variety of OS
     environments. Processes supported by different OS environments differ in a number
     of ways, including the following:
       How processes are named
       Whether threads are provided within processes
       How processes are represented
       How process resources are protected
       What mechanisms are used for interprocess communication and synchronization
       How processes are related to each other
        Accordingly, the native process structures and services provided by the
     Windows Kernel are relatively simple and general purpose, allowing each OS
     subsystem to emulate a particular process structure and functionality. Important
     characteristics of Windows processes are the following:
       Windows processes are implemented as objects.
       A process can be created as new process, or as a copy of an existing process.
       An executable process may contain one or more threads.
       Both process and thread objects have built-in synchronization capabilities.
        Figure 4.10, based on one in [RUSS11], illustrates the way in which a process
     relates to the resources it controls or uses. Each process is assigned a security access
                          Access
                          token
                                        Virtual     address   descriptors
        Process
        object
                                        Available
                  Handle table          objects
        Handle1                         Thread      x
        Handle2                         File     y
        Handle3                         Section     z
     Figure 4.10  A Windows Process and Its Resources

token, called the primary token of the process. When a user first logs on, Windows
creates an access token that includes the security ID for the user. Every process that
is created by or runs on behalf of this user has a copy of this access token. Windows
uses the token to validate the user's ability to access secured objects or to perform
restricted functions on the system and on secured objects. The access token controls
whether the process can change its own attributes. In this case, the process does not
have a handle opened to its access token. If the process attempts to open such a han-
dle, the security system determines whether this is permitted and therefore whether
the process may change its own attributes.
Also related to the process is a series of blocks that define the virtual address
space currently assigned to this process. The process cannot directly modify these
structures but must rely on the virtual memory manager, which provides a memory-
allocation service for the process.
Finally, the process includes an object table, with handles to other objects
known to this process. Figure 4.10 shows a single thread. In addition, the process
has access to a file object and to a section object that defines a section of shared
memory.
Process and Thread Objects
The object-oriented structure of Windows facilitates the development of a gen-
eral-purpose process facility. Windows makes use of two types of process-related
objects: processes and threads. A process is an entity corresponding to a user job
or application that owns resources, such as memory and open files. A thread is a
dispatchable unit of work that executes sequentially and is interruptible, so that the
processor can turn to another thread.
Each Windows process is represented by an object whose general structure
is shown in Figure 4.11a. Each process is defined by a number of attributes and
encapsulates a number of actions, or services, that it may perform. A process will
perform a service when called upon through a set of published interface methods.
When Windows creates a new process, it uses the object class, or type, defined for
the Windows process as a template to generate a new object instance. At the time of
creation, attribute values are assigned. Table 4.3 gives a brief definition of each of
the object attributes for a process object.
A Windows process must contain at least one thread to execute. That thread
may then create other threads. In a multiprocessor system, multiple threads from
the same process may execute in parallel. Figure 4.11b depicts the object structure
for a thread object, and Table 4.4 defines the thread object attributes. Note that
some of the attributes of a thread resemble those of a process. In those cases, the
thread attribute value is derived from the process attribute value. For example,
the thread processor affinity is the set of processors in a multiprocessor system
that may execute this thread; this set is equal to or a subset of the process processor
affinity.
Note that one of the attributes of a thread object is context, which contains the
values of the processor registers when the thread last ran. This information enables
threads to be suspended and resumed. Furthermore, it is possible to alter the behav-
ior of a thread by altering its context while it is suspended.

Object type                  Process                          Object type                   Thread
                Process ID                                                    Thread ID
                Security descriptor                                           Thread context
                Base priority                                                 Dynamic priority
Object body     Default processor affinity            Object body             Base priority
attributes      Quota limits                                  attributes      Thread processor affinity
                Execution time                                                Thread execution time
                I/O counters                                                  Alert status
                VM operation counters                                         Suspension count
                Exception/debugging ports                                     Impersonation token
                Exit status                                                   Termination port
                                                                              Thread exit status
                Create process
                Open process                                                  Create thread
Services        Query process information                                     Open thread
                Set process information                                       Query thread information
                Current process                                               Set thread information
                Terminate process                             Services        Current thread
                                                                              Terminate thread
                                                                              Get context
                     (a) Process object                                       Set context
                                                                              Suspend
                                                                              Resume
                                                                              Alert thread
                                                                              Test thread alert
                                                                              Register termination port
                                                                              (b) Thread object
Figure 4.11    Windows Process and Thread Objects
Table 4.3    Windows Process       Object Attributes
Process ID                           A unique value that identifies the process to the operating system.
Security descriptor                  Describes who created an object, who can gain access to or use the object, and
                                     who is denied access to the object.
Base priority                        A baseline execution priority for the process's threads.
Default processor affinity           The default set of processors on which the process's threads can run.
Quota limits                         The maximum amount of paged and nonpaged system memory, paging file
                                     space, and processor time a user's processes can use.
Execution time                       The total amount of time all threads in the process have executed.
I/O counters                         Variables that record the number and type of I/O operations that the process's
                                     threads have performed.
VM operation counters                Variables that record the number and types of virtual memory operations that
                                     the process's threads have performed.
Exception/debugging ports            Interprocess communication channels to which the process manager sends a
                                     message when one of the process's threads causes an exception. Normally,
                                     these are connected to environment subsystem and debugger processes,
                                     respectively.
Exit status                          The reason for a process's termination.

Table 4.4  Windows Thread Object Attributes
Thread ID                  A unique value that identifies a thread when it calls a server.
Thread context             The set of register values and other volatile data that defines the execution state
                           of a thread.
Dynamic priority           The thread's execution priority at any given moment.
Base priority              The lower limit of the thread's dynamic priority.
Thread processor affinity  The set of processors on which the thread can run, which is a subset or all of the
                           processor affinity of the thread's process.
Thread execution time      The cumulative amount of time a thread has executed in user mode and in
                           kernel mode.
Alert status               A flag that indicates whether a waiting thread may execute an asynchronous
                           procedure call.
Suspension count           The number of times the thread's execution has been suspended without being
                           resumed.
Impersonation token        A temporary access token allowing a thread to perform operations on behalf of
                           another process (used by subsystems).
Termination port           An interprocess communication channel to which the process manager sends a
                           message when the thread terminates (used by subsystems).
Thread exit status         The reason for a thread's termination.
           Multithreading
           Windows supports concurrency among processes because threads in different
           processes may execute concurrently (appear to run at the same time). Moreover, mul-
           tiple threads within the same process may be allocated to separate processors and
           execute simultaneously (actually run at the same time). A multithreaded process
           achieves concurrency without the overhead of using multiple processes. Threads
           within the same process can exchange information through their common address
           space and have access to the shared resources of the process. Threads in different
           processes can exchange information through shared memory that has been set up
           between the two processes.
                  An object-oriented multithreaded process is an efficient means of implementing
           a server application. For example, one server process can service a number of clients
           concurrently.
           Thread States
           An existing Windows thread is in one of six states (Figure 4.12):
                 Ready: A ready thread may be scheduled for execution. The Kernel dispatcher
                  keeps track of all ready threads and schedules them in priority order.
                 Standby: A standby thread has been selected to run next on a particular proc-
                  essor. The thread waits in this state until that processor is made available.
                  If the standby thread's priority is high enough, the running thread on that

     Runnable
                  Pick to                      Standby
                  run                                     Switch
                  Ready                        Preempted           Running
     Resource              Unblock/resume                 Block/                 Terminate
     available             Resource available             suspend
        Transition         Unblock             Waiting             Terminated
                       Resource not available
     Not runnable
     Figure 4.12  Windows Thread States
        processor may be preempted in favor of the standby thread. Otherwise, the
        standby thread waits until the running thread blocks or exhausts its time slice.
       Running: Once the Kernel dispatcher performs a thread switch, the standby
        thread enters the Running state and begins execution and continues execution
        until it is preempted by a higher-priority thread, exhausts its time slice, blocks,
        or terminates. In the first two cases, it goes back to the Ready state.
       Waiting: A thread enters the Waiting state when (1) it is blocked on an event
        (e.g., I/O), (2) it voluntarily waits for synchronization purposes, or (3) an
        environment subsystem directs the thread to suspend itself. When the waiting
        condition is satisfied, the thread moves to the Ready state if all of its resources
        are available.
       Transition: A thread enters this state after waiting if it is ready to run but the
        resources are not available. For example, the thread's stack may be paged
        out of memory. When the resources are available, the thread goes to the
        Ready state.
       Terminated: A thread can be terminated by itself, by another thread, or when
        its parent process terminates. Once housekeeping chores are completed, the
        thread is removed from the system, or it may be retained by the Executive6 for
        future reinitialization.
     6The Windows Executive is described in Chapter 2. It contains the base operating system services, such as
     memory management, process and thread management, security, I/O, and interprocess communication.

Support for OS Subsystems
The general-purpose process and thread facility must support the particular process
and thread structures of the various OS environments. It is the responsibility of
each OS subsystem to exploit the Windows process and thread features to emulate
the process and thread facilities of its corresponding OS. This area of process/thread
management is complicated, and we give only a brief overview here.
Process creation begins with a request for a new process from an application.
The application issues a create-process request to the corresponding protected
subsystem, which passes the request to the Executive. The Executive creates a proc-
ess object and returns a handle for that object to the subsystem. When Windows
creates a process, it does not automatically create a thread. In the case of Win32, a
new process must always be created with an initial thread. Therefore, for the Win32
subsystem calls the Windows process manager again to create a thread for the new
process, receiving a thread handle back from Windows. The appropriate thread and
process information are then returned to the application. In the case of POSIX,
threads are not supported. Therefore, the POSIX subsystem obtains a thread for
the new process from Windows so that the process may be activated but returns only
process information to the application. The fact that the POSIX process is imple-
mented using both a process and a thread from the Windows Executive is not visible
to the application.
When a new process is created by the Executive, the new process inherits
many of its attributes from the creating process. However, in the Win32 environ-
ment, this process creation is done indirectly. An application client process issues
its process creation request to the Win32 subsystem; then the subsystem in turn
issues a process request to the Windows executive. Because the desired effect is
that the new process inherits characteristics of the client process and not of the server
process, Windows enables the subsystem to specify the parent of the new process.
The new process then inherits the parent's access token, quota limits, base priority,
and default processor affinity.
Symmetric Multiprocessing Support
Windows supports SMP hardware configurations. The threads of any process,
including those of the executive, can run on any processor. In the absence of affin-
ity restrictions, explained in the next paragraph, the kernel dispatcher assigns a
ready thread to the next available processor. This assures that no processor is
idle or is executing a lower-priority thread when a higher-priority thread is ready.
Multiple threads from the same process can be executing simultaneously on
multiple processors.
As a default, the kernel dispatcher uses the policy of soft affinity in assign-
ing threads to processors: The dispatcher tries to assign a ready thread to the same
processor it last ran on. This helps reuse data still in that processor's memory caches
from the previous execution of the thread. It is possible for an application to restrict
its thread execution only to certain processors (hard affinity).

