Solaris Thread and SMP Management
182  CHAPTER 4 / THREADS
4.5  SOLARIS THREAD AND SMP MANAGEMENT
     Solaris implements multilevel thread support designed to provide considerable
     flexibility in exploiting processor resources.
     Multithreaded Architecture
     Solaris makes use of four separate thread-related concepts:
       Process: This is the normal UNIX process and includes the user's address
        space, stack, and process control block.
       User-level threads: Implemented through a threads library in the address
        space of a process, these are invisible to the OS. A user-level thread (ULT)7 is
        a user-created unit of execution within a process.
       Lightweight processes: A lightweight process (LWP) can be viewed as a map-
        ping between ULTs and kernel threads. Each LWP supports ULT and maps
        to one kernel thread. LWPs are scheduled by the kernel independently and
        may execute in parallel on multiprocessors.
       Kernel threads: These are the fundamental entities that can be scheduled and
        dispatched to run on one of the system processors.
        Figure 4.13 illustrates the relationship among these four entities. Note that
     there is always exactly one kernel thread for each LWP. An LWP is visible within a
     process to the application. Thus, LWP data structures exist within their respective
     process address space. At the same time, each LWP is bound to a single dispatchable
     kernel thread, and the data structure for that kernel thread is maintained within the
     kernel's address space.
                                             Process
                              User                       User
                              thread                     thread
                              Lightweight                Lightweight
                              process (LWP)            process (LWP)
        syscall()                                                        syscall()
                              Kernel                     Kernel
                              thread                     thread
                                           System calls
                                             Kernel
                                             Hardware
        Figure 4.13           Processes and Threads in Solaris [MCDO07]
     7Again, the acronym ULT is unique to this book and is not found in the Solaris literature.

                             4.5 / SOLARIS THREAD AND SMP MANAGEMENT                       183
   A process may consist of a single ULT bound to a single LWP. In this case, there
is a single thread of execution, corresponding to a traditional UNIX process. When
concurrency is not required within a single process, an application uses this process
structure. If an application requires concurrency, its process contains multiple threads,
each bound to a single LWP, which in turn are each bound to a single kernel thread.
   In addition, there are kernel threads that are not associated with LWPs. The
kernel creates, runs, and destroys these kernel threads to execute specific system
functions. The use of kernel threads rather than kernel processes to implement
system functions reduces the overhead of switching within the kernel (from a
process switch to a thread switch).
Motivation
The three-level thread structure (ULT, LWP, kernel thread) in Solaris is intended
to facilitate thread management by the OS and to provide a clean interface to appli-
cations. The ULT interface can be a standard thread library. A defined ULT maps
onto a LWP, which is managed by the OS and which has defined states of execution,
defined subsequently. An LWP is bound to a kernel thread with a one-to-one corre-
spondence in execution states. Thus, concurrency and execution are managed at the
level of the kernel thread.
   In addition, an application has access to hardware through an application pro-
gramming interface consisting of system calls. The API allows the user to invoke
kernel services to perform privileged tasks on behalf of the calling process, such as
read or write a file, issue a control command to a device, create a new process or
thread, allocate memory for the process to use, and so on.
Process Structure
Figure 4.14 compares, in general terms, the process structure of a traditional UNIX
system with that of Solaris. On a typical UNIX implementation, the process struc-
ture includes the process ID; the user IDs; a signal dispatch table, which the kernel
uses to decide what to do when sending a signal to a process; file descriptors, which
describe the state of files in use by this process; a memory map, which defines the
address space for this process; and a processor state structure, which includes the
kernel stack for this process. Solaris retains this basic structure but replaces the pro-
cessor state block with a list of structures containing one data block for each LWP.
   The LWP data structure includes the following elements:
  An LWP identifier
  The priority of this LWP and hence the kernel thread that supports it
  A signal mask that tells the kernel which signals will be accepted
  Saved values of user-level registers (when the LWP is not running)
  The kernel stack for this LWP, which includes system call arguments,   results,
   and error codes for each call level
  Resource usage and profiling data
  Pointer to the corresponding kernel thread
  Pointer to the process structure

184  CHAPTER 4 / THREADS
     UNIX process structure                            Solaris process structure
                Process ID                                       Process ID
                User IDs                                         User IDs
Signal dispatch table                               Signal dispatch table
                            Memory map                                       Memory map
                            Priority
                            Signal mask
                            Registers
                            STACK
     File descriptors                                  File descriptors
                            Processor state
                                                       LWP 2                 LWP 1
                                                       LWP ID                LWP ID
                                                       Priority              Priority
                                                    Signal mask             Signal mask
                                                    Registers               Registers
                                                       STACK                 STACK
Figure 4.14     Process Structure in Traditional UNIX and Solaris [LEWI96]
     Thread Execution
     Figure 4.15 shows a simplified view of both thread execution states. These states
     reflect the execution status of both a kernel thread and the LWP bound to it. As
     mentioned, some kernel threads are not associated with an LWP; the same execu-
     tion diagram applies. The states are as follows:
               RUN: The thread is runnable; that is, the thread is ready to execute.
               ONPROC: The thread is executing on a processor.
               SLEEP: The thread is blocked.
               STOP: The thread is stopped.
               ZOMBIE: The thread has terminated.
               FREE: Thread resources have been released and the thread is              awaiting
                removal from the OS thread data structure.
                A thread moves from ONPROC to RUN if it is preempted by a higher-priority
     thread or because of time slicing. A thread moves from ONPROC to SLEEP if it

                             4.5  /  SOLARIS THREAD  AND   SMP  MANAGEMENT           185
IDL                                  PINNED
thread_create()                         intr()
                    swtch()
RUN                                  ONPROC     syscall()       SLEEP
                    preempt()
                                             wakeup()
                    STOP                        ZOMBIE                    FREE
     prun()                    pstop()  exit()                  reap()
Figure 4.15  Solaris Thread States
is blocked and must await an event to return the RUN state. Blocking occurs if the
thread invokes a system call and must wait for the system service to be performed.
A thread enters the STOP state if its process is stopped; this might be done for
debugging purposes.
Interrupts as Threads
Most operating systems contain two fundamental forms of concurrent activity:
processes and interrupts. Processes (or threads) cooperate with each other and
manage the use of shared data structures by means of a variety of primitives
that enforce mutual exclusion (only one process at a time can execute certain
code or access certain data) and that synchronize their execution. Interrupts are
synchronized by preventing their handling for a period of time. Solaris unifies
these two concepts into a single model, namely kernel threads and the mechanisms
for scheduling and executing kernel threads. To do this, interrupts are converted
to kernel threads.
The motivation for converting interrupts to threads is to reduce overhead.
Interrupt handlers often manipulate data shared by the rest of the kernel. Therefore,
while a kernel routine that accesses such data is executing, interrupts must be
blocked, even though most interrupts will not affect that data. Typically, the way
this is done is for the routine to set the interrupt priority level higher to block inter-
rupts and then lower the priority level after access is completed. These operations
take time. The problem is magnified on a multiprocessor system. The kernel must
protect more objects and may need to block interrupts on all processors.

186  CHAPTER 4 / THREADS
         The solution in Solaris can be summarized as follows:
     1.  Solaris employs a set of kernel threads to handle interrupts. As with any kernel
         thread, an interrupt thread has its own identifier, priority, context, and stack.
     2.  The kernel controls access to data structures and synchronizes among inter-
         rupt threads using mutual exclusion primitives, of the type discussed in
         Chapter 5. That is, the normal synchronization techniques for threads are used
         in handling interrupts.
     3.  Interrupt threads are assigned higher priorities than all other types of kernel
         threads.
         When an interrupt occurs, it is delivered to a particular processor and the
     thread that was executing on that processor is pinned. A pinned thread cannot
     move to another processor and its context is preserved; it is simply suspended until
     the interrupt is processed. The processor then begins executing an interrupt thread.
     There is a pool of deactivated interrupt threads available, so that a new thread crea-
     tion is not required. The interrupt thread then executes to handle the interrupt.
     If the handler routine needs access to a data structure that is currently locked in
     some fashion for use by another executing thread, the interrupt thread must wait for
     access to that data structure. An interrupt thread can only be preempted by another
     interrupt thread of higher priority.
         Experience with Solaris interrupt threads indicates that this approach provides
     superior performance to the traditional interrupt-handling strategy [KLEI95].
4.6  LINUX PROCESS AND THREAD MANAGEMENT
     Linux Tasks
     A process, or task, in Linux is represented by a task_struct data structure. The
     task_struct data structure contains information in a number of categories:
        State: The execution state of the process (executing, ready, suspended,
         stopped, zombie). This is described subsequently.
        Scheduling information: Information needed by Linux to schedule processes.
         A process can be normal or real time and has a priority. Real-time processes
         are scheduled before normal processes, and within each category, relative pri-
         orities can be used. A counter keeps track of the amount of time a process is
         allowed to execute.
        Identifiers: Each process has a unique process identifier and also has user and
         group identifiers. A group identifier is used to assign resource access privi-
         leges to a group of processes.
        Interprocess communication: Linux supports the IPC mechanisms found in
         UNIX SVR4, described in Chapter 6.
        Links: Each process includes a link to its parent process, links to its siblings
         (processes with the same parent), and links to all of its children.
