Recommended Reading
     All functions in GCD begin with dispatch_. The outer dispatch_
     async() call puts a task on a global concurrent queue. This tells the OS that the
     block can be assigned to a separate concurrent queue, off the main queue, and exe-
     cuted in parallel. Therefore, the main thread of execution is not delayed. When the
     analyze function is complete, the inner dispatch_async() call is encountered.
     This directs the OS to put the following block of code at the end of the main queue,
     to be executed when it reaches the head of the queue. So, with very little work on
     the part of the programmer, the desired requirement is met.
4.8  SUMMARY
     Some operating systems distinguish the concepts of process and thread, the for-
     mer related to resource ownership and the latter related to program execution.
     This approach may lead to improved efficiency and coding convenience. In a mul-
     tithreaded system, multiple concurrent threads may be defined within a single
     process. This may be done using either user-level threads or kernel-level threads.
     User-level threads are unknown to the OS and are created and managed by a
     threads library that runs in the user space of a process. User-level threads are
     very efficient because a mode switch is not required to switch from one thread
     to another. However, only a single user-level thread within a process can execute
     at a time, and if one thread blocks, the entire process is blocked. Kernel-level
     threads are threads within a process that are maintained by the kernel. Because
     they are recognized by the kernel, multiple threads within the same process can
     execute in parallel on a multiprocessor and the blocking of a thread does not
     block the entire process. However, a mode switch is required to switch from one
     thread to another.
4.9  RECOMMENDED READING
     [LEWI96] and [KLEI96] provide good overviews of thread concepts and a discus-
     sion of programming strategies; the former focuses more on concepts and the latter
     more on programming, but both provide useful coverage of both topics. [PHAM96]
     discusses the Windows NT thread facility in depth. Good coverage of UNIX threads
     concepts is found in [ROBB04].
     KLEI96  Kleiman, S., Shah, D., and Smallders, B. Programming with Threads. Upper
     Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.
     LEWI96  Lewis, B., and Berg, D. Threads Primer. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
     Hall, 1996.
     PHAM96  Pham, T., and Garg, P. Multithreaded Programming with Windows NT.
     Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.
     ROBB04  Robbins, K., and Robbins, S. UNIX Systems Programming: Communication,
     Concurrency, and Threads. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.

4.10 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
kernel-level thread              multithreading                  task
lightweight process              port                            thread
message                          process                         user-level thread
Review Questions
         4.1  Table 3.5 lists typical elements found in a process control block for an unthreaded OS.
              Of these, which should belong to a thread control block and which should belong to a
              process control block for a multithreaded system?
         4.2  List reasons why a mode switch between threads may be cheaper than a mode switch
              between processes.
         4.3  What are the two separate and potentially independent characteristics embodied in
              the concept of process?
         4.4  Give four general examples of the use of threads in a single-user multiprocessing sys-
              tem.
         4.5  What resources are typically shared by all of the threads of a process?
         4.6  List three advantages of ULTs over KLTs.
         4.7  List two disadvantages of ULTs compared to KLTs.
         4.8  Define jacketing.
Problems
         4.1  It was pointed out that two advantages of using multiple threads within a process
              are that (1) less work is involved in creating a new thread within an existing process
              than in creating a new process, and (2) communication among threads within the
              same process is simplified. Is it also the case that a mode switch between two threads
              within the same process involves less work than a mode switch between two threads
              in different processes?
         4.2  In the discussion of ULTs versus KLTs, it was pointed out that a disadvantage of ULTs
              is that when a ULT executes a system call, not only is that thread blocked, but also all
              of the threads within the process are blocked. Why is that so?
         4.3  OS/2 is an obsolete OS for PCs from IBM. In OS/2, what is commonly embodied in
              the concept of process in other operating systems is split into three separate types
              of entities: session, processes, and threads. A session is a collection of one or more
              processes associated with a user interface (keyboard, display, and mouse). The ses-
              sion represents an interactive user application, such as a word processing program
              or a spreadsheet. This concept allows the personal-computer user to open more than
              one application, giving each one or more windows on the screen. The OS must keep
              track of which window, and therefore which session, is active, so that keyboard and
              mouse input are routed to the appropriate session. At any time, one session is in
              foreground mode, with other sessions in background mode. All keyboard and mouse
              input is directed to one of the processes of the foreground session, as dictated by

          the applications. When a session is in foreground mode, a process performing video
          output sends it directly to the hardware video buffer and thence to the user's screen.
          When the session is moved to the background, the hardware video buffer is saved to
          a logical video buffer for that session. While a session is in background, if any of the
          threads of any of the processes of that session executes and produces screen output,
          that output is directed to the logical video buffer. When the session returns to fore-
          ground, the screen is updated to reflect the current contents of the logical video buffer
          for the new foreground session.
              There is a way to reduce the number of process-related concepts in OS/2 from
          three to two. Eliminate sessions, and associate the user interface (keyboard, mouse,
          and screen) with processes. Thus, one process at a time is in foreground mode. For
          further structuring, processes can be broken up into threads.
          a.  What benefits are lost with this approach?
          b.  If you go ahead with this modification, where do you assign resources (memory,
              files, etc.): at the process or thread level?
     4.4  Consider an environment in which there is a one-to-one mapping between user-level
          threads and kernel-level threads that allows one or more threads within a process
          to issue blocking system calls while other threads continue to run. Explain why this
          model can make multithreaded programs run faster than their single-threaded coun-
          terparts on a uniprocessor computer.
     4.5  If a process exits and there are still threads of that process running, will they continue
          to run?
     4.6  The OS/390 mainframe operating system is structured around the concepts of
          address space and task. Roughly speaking, a single address space corresponds to
          a single application and corresponds more or less to a process in other operat-
          ing systems. Within an address space, a number of tasks may be generated and
          execute concurrently; this corresponds roughly to the concept of multithreading.
          Two data structures are key to managing this task structure. An address space
          control     block  (ASCB)  contains    information  about  an  address  space  needed
          by OS/390 whether or not that address space is executing. Information in the
          ASCB includes dispatching priority, real and virtual memory allocated to this
          address space, the number of ready tasks in this address space, and whether
          each is swapped out. A task control block (TCB) represents a user program in
          execution. It contains information needed for managing a task within an address
          space, including processor status information, pointers to programs that are part
          of this task, and task execution state. ASCBs are global structures maintained in
          system memory, while TCBs are local structures maintained within their address
          space. What is the advantage of splitting the control information into global and
          local portions?
     4.7  Many current language specifications, such as for C and C++, are inadequate for
          multithreaded programs. This can have an impact on compilers and the correctness
          of code, as this problem illustrates. Consider the following declarations and function
          definition:
              int      global_positives       =  0;
              typedef        struct  list  {
                      struct  list   *next;
                      double  val;
              }    *   list;

         void  count_positives(list                l)
         {
               list    p;
               for   (p    =  l;   p;  p  =  p   ->  next)
                    if   (p   ->   val    >  0.0)
                         ++global_positives;
         }
     Now consider the case in which thread A performs
         count_positives(<list               containing    only  negative  values>);
     while thread B performs
         ++global_positives;
     a.  What does the function do?
     b.  The C language only addresses single-threaded execution. Does the use of two
         parallel threads create any problems or potential problems?
4.8  But some existing optimizing compilers (including gcc, which tends to be relatively
     conservative) will "optimize" count_positives to something similar to
         void  count_positives(list                l)
         {
               list    p;
               register       int  r;
         r  =  global_positives;
               for   (p    =  l;   p;  p  =  p   ->  next)
                    if   (p   ->   val    >  0.0)    ++r;
               global_positives           =  r;
         }
     What problem or potential problem occurs with this compiled version of the program
     if threads A and B are executed concurrently?
4.9  Consider the following code using the POSIX Pthreads API:
         thread2.c
         #include       <pthread.h>
         #include       <stdlib.h>
         #include       <unistd.h>
         #include       <stdio.h>
         int   myglobal;
               void    *thread_function(void             *arg)   {
                    int    i,j;
                    for    (  i=0;     i<20;    i++  )  {
                         j=myglobal;
                         j=j+1;
                         printf(".");
                         fflush(stdout);
                         sleep(1);
                         myglobal=j;
                    }

                            return     NULL;
               }
               int       main(void)       {
                      pthread_t        mythread;
                      int   i;
                      if    (   pthread_create(           &mythread,     NULL,      thread_function,
                               NULL)   )  {
                            printf(ldquo;error              creating     thread.");
                            abort();
                      }
               for       (  i=0;  i<20;      i++)      {
                      myglobal=myglobal+1;
                      printf("o");
                      fflush(stdout);
                      sleep(1);
               }
               if     (     pthread_join         (  mythread,    NULL    )  )  {
                      printf("error          joining        thread.");
                      abort();
               }
               printf("\nmyglobal                   equals  %d\n",myglobal);
               exit(0);
               }
           In  main()       we  first  declare      a  variable  called  mythread,  which  has  a  type  of
           pthread_t. This is essentially an ID for a thread. Next, the if statement cre-
           ates a thread associated with mythread. The call pthread_create() returns
           zero on success and a nonzero value on failure. The third argument of pthread_
           create() is the name of a function that the new thread will execute when it starts.
           When this thread_function() returns, the thread terminates. Meanwhile, the
           main program itself defines a thread, so that there are two threads executing. The
           pthread_join function enables the main thread to wait until the new thread
           completes.
           a.  What does this program accomplish?
           b.  Here is the output from the executed program:
               $   ./thread2
               ..o.o.o.o.oo.o.o.o.o.o.o.o.o.o..o.o.o.o.o
               myglobal         equals       21
           Is this the output you would expect? If not, what has gone wrong?
     4.10  The Solaris documentation states that a ULT may yield to another thread of the same
           priority. Isn't it possible that there will be a runnable thread of higher priority and that
           therefore the yield function should result in yielding to a thread of the same or higher
           priority?
     4.11  In Solaris 9 and Solaris 10, there is a one-to-one mapping between ULTs and LWPs. In
           Solaris 8, a single LWP supports one or more ULTs.
           a.  What is the possible benefit of allowing a many-to-one mapping of ULTs to
               LWPs?

                           Stop                                       User-level threads
                                     Runnable
                           Continue                                   Wakeup
                                              Dispatch
           Stopped                                      Stop                    Sleeping
                                     Preempt
                           Stop                         Sleep
                                     Active
           Time slice
           or preempt                Running                                    Stop
                           Dispatch                                   Wakeup
                                              Blocking
           Runnable                           system                            Stopped
                                              call
                                                                      Continue
                           Wakeup
                                     Blocked                          Stop
           Lightweight processes
           Figure 4.17     Solaris User-Level Thread and LWP States
       b.  In Solaris 8, the thread execution state of a ULT is distinct from that of its LWP.
           Explain why.
       c.  Figure 4.17 shows the state transition diagrams for a ULT and its associated
           LWP in Solaris 8 and 9. Explain the operation of the two diagrams and their
           relationships.
4.12.  Explain the rationale for the Uninterruptible state in Linux.

CONCURRENCY:
MUTUAL EXCLUSION AND
SYNCHRONIZATION
     5.1  Principles of Concurrency
          A Simple Example
          Race Condition
          Operating System Concerns
          Process Interaction
          Requirements for Mutual Exclusion
     5.2  Mutual Exclusion: Hardware Support
          Interrupt Disabling
          Special Machine Instructions
     5.3  Semaphores
          Mutual Exclusion
          The Producer/Consumer Problem
          Implementation of Semaphores
     5.4  Monitors
          Monitor with Signal
          Alternate Model of Monitors with Notify and Broadcast
     5.5  Message Passing
          Synchronization
          Addressing
          Message Format
          Queueing Discipline
          Mutual Exclusion
     5.6  Readers/Writers Problem
          Readers Have Priority
          Writers Have Priority
     5.7  Summary
     5.8  Recommended Reading
     5.9  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
198
