Mutual Exclusion: Hardware Support
                 5.2 / MUTUAL EXCLUSION: HARDWARE SUPPORT                                209
     the problems of deadlock and starvation are still present. As an example of dead-
     lock, two processes may be blocked, each waiting for a communication from the
     other. As an example of starvation, consider three processes, P1, P2, and P3, that
     exhibit the following behavior. P1 is repeatedly attempting to communicate with
     either P2 or P3, and P2 and P3 are both attempting to communicate with P1. A
     sequence could arise in which P1 and P2 exchange information repeatedly, while P3
     is blocked waiting for a communication from P1. There is no deadlock, because P1
     remains active, but P3 is starved.
     Requirements for Mutual Exclusion
     Any facility or capability that is to provide support for mutual exclusion should
     meet the following requirements:
     1.  Mutual exclusion must be enforced: Only one process at a time is allowed into
         its critical section, among all processes that have critical sections for the same
         resource or shared object.
     2.  A process that halts in its noncritical section must do so without interfering
         with other processes.
     3.  It must not be possible for a process requiring access to a critical section to be
         delayed indefinitely: no deadlock or starvation.
     4.  When no process is in a critical section, any process that requests entry to its
         critical section must be permitted to enter without delay.
     5.  No assumptions are made about relative process speeds or number of processors.
     6.  A process remains inside its critical section for a finite time only.
         There are a number of ways in which the requirements for mutual exclusion
     can be satisfied. One approach is to leave the responsibility with the processes
     that wish to execute concurrently. Processes, whether they are system programs or
     application programs, would be required to coordinate with one another to enforce
     mutual exclusion, with no support from the programming language or the OS. We
     can refer to these as software approaches. Although this approach is prone to high
     processing overhead and bugs, it is nevertheless useful to examine such approaches
     to gain a better understanding of the complexity of concurrent processing. This
     topic is covered in Appendix A. A second approach involves the use of special-
     purpose machine instructions. These have the advantage of reducing overhead but
     nevertheless will be shown to be unattractive as a general-purpose solution; they are
     covered in Section 5.2. A third approach is to provide some level of support within
     the OS or a programming language. Three of the most important such approaches
     are examined in Sections 5.3 through 5.5.
5.2  MUTUAL EXCLUSION: HARDWARE SUPPORT
     In this section, we look at several interesting hardware approaches to mutual
     exclusion.

210  CHAPTER 5 / CONCURRENCY: MUTUAL EXCLUSION AND SYNCHRONIZATION
     Interrupt Disabling
     In a uniprocessor system, concurrent processes cannot have overlapped execution;
     they can only be interleaved. Furthermore, a process will continue to run until it
     invokes an OS service or until it is interrupted. Therefore, to guarantee mutual
     exclusion, it is sufficient to prevent a process from being interrupted. This capability
     can be provided in the form of primitives defined by the OS kernel for disabling and
     enabling interrupts. A process can then enforce mutual exclusion in the following
     way (compare Figure 5.1):
     while           (true)   {
        /*           disable     interrupts  */;
        /*           critical    section  */;
        /*           enable   interrupts     */;
        /*           remainder   */;
     }
     Because the critical section cannot be interrupted, mutual exclusion is guar-
     anteed. The price of this approach, however, is high. The efficiency of execution
     could be noticeably degraded because the processor is limited in its ability to
     interleave processes. Another problem is that this approach will not work in a
     multiprocessor architecture. When the computer includes more than one proces-
     sor, it is possible (and typical) for more than one process to be executing at a time.
     In this case, disabled interrupts do not guarantee mutual exclusion.
     Special Machine Instructions
     In a multiprocessor configuration, several processors share access to a common
     main memory. In this case, there is not a master/slave relationship; rather the pro-
     cessors behave independently in a peer relationship. There is no interrupt mecha-
     nism between processors on which mutual exclusion can be based.
     At the hardware level, as was mentioned, access to a memory location
     excludes any other access to that same location. With this as a foundation, proc-
     essor designers have proposed several machine instructions that carry out two
     actions atomically,2 such as reading and writing or reading and testing, of a single
     memory location with one instruction fetch cycle. During execution of the instruc-
     tion, access to the memory location is blocked for any other instruction referencing
     that location.
     In this section, we look at two of the most commonly implemented instruc-
     tions. Others are described in [RAYN86] and [STON93].
     COMPARE&SWAP INSTRUCTION         The compare&swap instruction, also called a
     compare and exchange instruction, can be defined as follows [HERL90]:
     2The term atomic means that the instruction is treated as a single step that cannot be interrupted.

                                               5.2 / MUTUAL EXCLUSION: HARDWARE SUPPORT                                         211
                   int        compare_and_swap                (int   *word,           int          testval,        int     newval)
                   {
                              int      oldval;
                              oldval        =  *word
                              if      (oldval   ==      testval)          *word          =     newval;
                              return        oldval;
                   }
                   This version of the instruction checks a memory location (*word) against a test
            value (testval). If the memory location's current value is testval, it is replaced with
            newval; otherwise it is left unchanged. The old memory value is always returned;
            thus, the memory location has been updated if the returned value is the same as
            the test value. This atomic instruction therefore has two parts: A compare is made
            between a memory value and a test value; if the values are the same, a swap occurs.
            The entire compare&swap function is carried out atomically--that is, it is not sub-
            ject to interruption.
                   Another version of this instruction returns a Boolean value: true if the swap
            occurred; false otherwise. Some version of this instruction is available on nearly all
            processor families (x86, IA64, sparc, IBM z series, etc.), and most operating systems
            use this instruction for support of concurrency.
                   Figure 5.2a shows a mutual exclusion protocol based on the use of this instruc-
            tion.3 A shared variable bolt is initialized to 0. The only process that may enter
            its critical section is one that finds bolt equal to 0. All other processes attempting
/*   program       mutualexclusion         */                        /*   program        mutualexclusion           */
const   int    n   =   /*     number   of  processes    */;          int     const    n     =  /*     number   of  processes    */;
int     bolt;                                                        int     bolt;
void    P(int      i)                                                void    P(int       i)
{                                                                    {
     while     (true)      {                                              int   keyi        =  1;
        while      (compare_and_swap(bolt,      0,      1)   ==  1)       while       (true)       {
               /*  do  nothing        */;                                      do     exchange        (&keyi,      &bolt)
        /*  critical          section  */;                                     while        (keyi     !=  0);
        bolt   =   0;                                                          /*     critical        section      */;
        /*  remainder         */;                                              bolt      =     0;
     }                                                                         /*     remainder       */;
}                                                                         }
void    main()                                                       }
{                                                                    void    main()
     bolt   =  0;                                                    {
     parbegin      (P(1),     P(2),    ...     ,P(n));                    bolt     =  0;
                                                                          parbegin          (P(1),    P(2),    ...,     P(n));
}                                                                    }
            (a) Compare and swap instruction                                          (b) Exchange instruction
Figure 5.2     Hardware Support for Mutual Exclusion
            3The construct parbegin (P1,        P2,     ...,  Pn) means the following: suspend the execution of the main
            program; initiate concurrent execution of procedures P1, P2, ..., Pn; when all of P1, P2, ..., Pn have ter-
            minated, resume the main program.

212  CHAPTER 5 / CONCURRENCY: MUTUAL EXCLUSION AND SYNCHRONIZATION
     to enter their critical section go into a busy waiting mode. The term busy waiting,
     or spin waiting, refers to a technique in which a process can do nothing until it gets
     permission to enter its critical section but continues to execute an instruction or set
     of instructions that tests the appropriate variable to gain entrance. When a process
     leaves its critical section, it resets bolt to 0; at this point one and only one of the wait-
     ing processes is granted access to its critical section. The choice of process depends
     on which process happens to execute the compare&swap instruction next.
     EXCHANGE INSTRUCTION     The exchange instruction can be defined as follows:
        void     exchange     (int    *register,       int   *memory)
        {
           int   temp;
           temp      =  *memory;
           *memory      =  *register;
           *register       =  temp;
        }
     The instruction exchanges the contents of a register with that of a memory location.
     Both the Intel IA-32 architecture (Pentium) and the IA-64 architecture (Itanium)
     contain an XCHG instruction.
        Figure 5.2b shows a mutual exclusion protocol based on the use of an exchange
     instruction. A shared variable bolt is initialized to 0. Each process uses a local vari-
     able key that is initialized to 1. The only process that may enter its critical section
     is one that finds bolt equal to 0. It excludes all other processes from the critical sec-
     tion by setting bolt to 1. When a process leaves its critical section, it resets bolt to 0,
     allowing another process to gain access to its critical section.
        Note that the following expression always holds because of the way in which
     the variables are initialized and because of the nature of the exchange algorithm:
                                      bolt  +  a keyi  =  n
                                               i
     If bolt = 0, then no process is in its critical section. If bolt = 1, then exactly one pro-
     cess is in its critical section, namely the process whose key value equals 0.
     PROPERTIES  OF  THE   MACHINE-INSTRUCTION         APPROACH        The use of a special
     machine instruction to enforce mutual exclusion has a number of advantages:
       It is applicable to any number of processes on either a single processor or mul-
        tiple processors sharing main memory.
       It is simple and therefore easy to verify.
       It can be used to support multiple critical sections; each critical section can be
        defined by its own variable.
        There are some serious disadvantages:
      Busy waiting is employed: Thus, while a process is waiting for access to a criti-
        cal section, it continues to consume processor time.

                                                                              5.3 / SEMAPHORES                    213
               Starvation is possible: When a process leaves a critical section and more than
                one process is waiting, the selection of a waiting process is arbitrary. Thus,
                some process could indefinitely be denied access.
               Deadlock is possible: Consider the following scenario on a single-processor
                system. Process P1 executes the special instruction (e.g., compare&swap,
                exchange) and enters its critical section. P1 is then interrupted to give the
                processor to P2, which has higher priority. If P2 now attempts to use the same
                resource as P1, it will be denied access because of the mutual exclusion mecha-
                nism. Thus, it will go into a busy waiting loop. However, P1 will never be dis-
                patched because it is of lower priority than another ready process, P2.
                Because of the drawbacks of both the software and hardware solutions, we
           need to look for other mechanisms.
5.3        SEMAPHORES
           We now turn to OS and programming language mechanisms that are used to pro-
           vide concurrency. Table 5.3 summarizes mechanisms in common use. We begin, in
           this section, with semaphores. The next two sections discuss monitors and message
           passing. The other mechanisms in Table 5.3 are discussed when treating specific
           OS examples, in Chapters 6 and 13.
Table 5.3  Common   Concurrency Mechanisms
Semaphore           An integer value used for signaling among processes. Only three operations may be
                    performed on a semaphore, all of which are atomic: initialize, decrement, and incre-
                    ment. The decrement operation may result in the blocking of a process, and the incre-
                    ment operation may result in the unblocking of a process. Also known as a counting
                    semaphore or a general semaphore.
Binary Semaphore    A semaphore that takes on only the values 0 and 1.
Mutex               Similar to a binary semaphore. A key difference between the two is that the process that
                    locks the mutex (sets the value to zero) must be the one to unlock it (sets the value to 1).
Condition Variable  A data type that is used to block a process or thread until a particular condition is true.
Monitor             A programming language construct that encapsulates variables, access procedures, and
                    initialization code within an abstract data type. The monitor's variable may only be
                    accessed via its access procedures and only one process may be actively accessing the
                    monitor at any one time. The access procedures are critical sections. A monitor may
                    have a queue of processes that are waiting to access it.
Event Flags         A memory word used as a synchronization mechanism. Application code may associ-
                    ate a different event with each bit in a flag. A thread can wait for either a single event
                    or a combination of events by checking one or multiple bits in the corresponding flag.
                    The thread is blocked until all of the required bits are set (AND) or until at least one
                    of the bits is set (OR).
Mailboxes/Messages  A means for two processes to exchange information and that may be used for
                    synchronization.
Spinlocks           Mutual exclusion mechanism in which a process executes in an infinite loop waiting for
                    the value of a lock variable to indicate availability.
