Monitors

          Semaphores provide a primitive yet powerful and flexible tool for enforcing mutual
          exclusion and for coordinating processes. However, as Figure 5.9 suggests, it may be
          difficult to produce a correct program using semaphores. The difficulty is that sem-
          Wait and semSignal operations may be scattered throughout a program and it is
          not easy to see the overall effect of these operations on the semaphores they affect.
                 The monitor is a programming-language construct that provides equivalent
          functionality to that of semaphores and that is easier to control. The concept was
          first formally defined in [HOAR74]. The monitor construct has been implemented
          in a number of programming languages, including Concurrent Pascal, Pascal-Plus,
          Modula-2, Modula-3, and Java. It has also been implemented as a program library.
          This allows programmers to put a monitor lock on any object. In particular, for

something like a linked list, you may want to lock all linked lists with one lock, or
have one lock for each list, or have one lock for each element of each list.
    We begin with a look at Hoare's version and then examine a refinement.
Monitor with Signal
A monitor is a software module consisting of one or more procedures, an initial-
ization sequence, and local data. The chief characteristics of a monitor are the
following:
1.  The local data variables are accessible only by the monitor's procedures and
    not by any external procedure.
2.  A process enters the monitor by invoking one of its procedures.
3.  Only one process may be executing in the monitor at a time; any other pro-
    cesses that have invoked the monitor are blocked, waiting for the monitor to
    become available.
The first two characteristics are reminiscent of those for objects in object-oriented
software. Indeed, an object-oriented OS or programming language can readily
implement a monitor as an object with special characteristics.
    By enforcing the discipline of one process at a time, the monitor is able to pro-
vide a mutual exclusion facility. The data variables in the monitor can be accessed
by only one process at a time. Thus, a shared data structure can be protected by
placing it in a monitor. If the data in a monitor represent some resource, then the
monitor provides a mutual exclusion facility for accessing the resource.
    To be useful for concurrent processing, the monitor must include synchroni-
zation tools. For example, suppose a process invokes the monitor and, while in the
monitor, must be blocked until some condition is satisfied. A facility is needed by
which the process is not only blocked but releases the monitor so that some other
process may enter it. Later, when the condition is satisfied and the monitor is again
available, the process needs to be resumed and allowed to reenter the monitor at
the point of its suspension.
    A monitor supports synchronization by the use of condition variables that are
contained within the monitor and accessible only within the monitor. Condition var-
iables are a special data type in monitors, which are operated on by two functions:
·   cwait(c): Suspend execution of the calling process on condition c. The mon-
    itor is now available for use by another process.
·   csignal(c): Resume execution of some process blocked after a cwait on
    the same condition. If there are several such processes, choose one of them; if
    there is no such process, do nothing.
    Note that monitor wait and signal operations are different from those for the
semaphore. If a process in a monitor signals and no task is waiting on the condition
variable, the signal is lost.
    Figure 5.15 illustrates the structure of a monitor. Although a process can enter
the monitor by invoking any of its procedures, we can think of the monitor as hav-
ing a single entry point that is guarded so that only one process may be in the moni-
tor at a time. Other processes that attempt to enter the monitor join a queue of

                                                                     Queue of
                                                                     entering
                                                                     processes
                    Monitor waiting area       Entrance
                                               MONITOR
                                 Condition c1            Local data
                                 cwait(c1)
                                               Condition variables
                                               Procedure 1
                                 Condition cn
                                 cwait(cn)     Procedure k
                                 Urgent queue
                                 csignal                 Initialization code
                                                         Exit
                    Figure 5.15  Structure of a Monitor
     processes blocked waiting for monitor availability. Once a process is in the monitor,
     it may temporarily block itself on condition x by issuing cwait(x); it is then placed
     in a queue of processes waiting to reenter the monitor when the condition changes,
     and resume execution at the point in its program following the cwait(x) call.
     If a process that is executing in the monitor detects a change in the condition
     variable x, it issues csignal(x), which alerts the corresponding condition queue
     that the condition has changed.
     As an example of the use of a monitor, let us return to the bounded-buffer
     producer/consumer problem. Figure 5.16 shows a solution using a monitor. The
     monitor module, boundedbuffer, controls the buffer used to store and retrieve
     characters. The monitor includes two condition variables (declared with the con-
     struct cond): notfull is true when there is room to add at least one character to the
     buffer, and notempty is true when there is at least one character in the buffer.

/*   program   producerconsumer               */
monitor   boundedbuffer;
char  buffer      [N];                                                                     /*   space  for      N  items   */
int   nextin,     nextout;                                                                     /*  buffer   pointers       */
int   count;                                                                   /*  number      of  items    in     buffer  */
cond  notfull,        notempty;                             /*  condition  variables       for     synchronization         */
void  append      (char      x)
{
      if     (count      ==  N)     cwait(notfull);                    /*  buffer      is  full;   avoid    overflow       */
      buffer[nextin]             =  x;
      nextin       =     (nextin    +   1)    %   N;
      count++;
      /*     one   more      item   in     buffer     */
      csignal         (nonempty);                                          /*resume        any     waiting  consumer       */
}
void  take    (char      x)
{
      if     (count      ==  0)     cwait(notempty);               /*  buffer      is  empty;      avoid    underflow      */
      x   =   buffer[nextout];
      nextout         =  (nextout       +     1)  %   N);
      count--;                                                                 /*  one     fewer   item     in     buffer  */
      csignal         (notfull);                                           /*  resume      any     waiting  producer       */
}
{                                                                                                  /*  monitor     body    */
      nextin       =     0;  nextout       =  0;     count  =  0;                  /*  buffer      initially       empty   */
}
void  producer()
{
      char     x;
      while       (true)     {
      produce(x);
      append(x);
      }
}
void  consumer()
{
      char     x;
      while       (true)     {
      take(x);
      consume(x);
      }
}
void  main()
{
      parbegin           (producer,        consumer);
}
Figure 5.16    A Solution to the Bounded-Buffer Producer/Consumer Problem Using a
               Monitor
      A producer can add characters to the buffer only by means of the procedure
append inside the monitor; the producer does not have direct access to buffer. The
procedure first checks the condition notfull to determine if there is space available
in the buffer. If not, the process executing the monitor is blocked on that condition.
Some other process (producer or consumer) may now enter the monitor. Later,
when the buffer is no longer full, the blocked process may be removed from the
queue, reactivated, and resume processing. After placing a character in the buffer,

     the process signals the notempty condition. A similar description can be made of the
     consumer function.
         This example points out the division of responsibility with monitors compared
     to semaphores. In the case of monitors, the monitor construct itself enforces mutual
     exclusion: It is not possible for both a producer and a consumer simultaneously to
     access the buffer. However, the programmer must place the appropriate cwait and
     csignal primitives inside the monitor to prevent processes from depositing items in
     a full buffer or removing them from an empty one. In the case of semaphores, both
     mutual exclusion and synchronization are the responsibility of the programmer.
         Note that in Figure 5.16, a process exits the monitor immediately after executing
     the csignal function. If the csignal does not occur at the end of the procedure,
     then, in Hoare's proposal, the process issuing the signal is blocked to make the moni-
     tor available and placed in a queue until the monitor is free. One possibility at this
     point would be to place the blocked process in the entrance queue, so that it would
     have to compete for access with other processes that had not yet entered the monitor.
     However, because a process blocked on a csignal function has already partially
     performed its task in the monitor, it makes sense to give this process precedence over
     newly entering processes by setting up a separate urgent queue (Figure 5.15). One
     language that uses monitors, Concurrent Pascal, requires that csignal only appear
     as the last operation executed by a monitor procedure.
         If there are no processes waiting on condition x, then the execution of
     csignal(x) has no effect.
         As with semaphores, it is possible to make mistakes in the synchroniza-
     tion function of monitors. For example, if either of the csignal functions in the
     boundedbuffer monitor are omitted, then processes entering the corresponding
     condition queue are permanently hung up. The advantage that monitors have over
     semaphores is that all of the synchronization functions are confined to the monitor.
     Therefore, it is easier to verify that the synchronization has been done correctly and
     to detect bugs. Furthermore, once a monitor is correctly programmed, access to the
     protected resource is correct for access from all processes. In contrast, with sema-
     phores, resource access is correct only if all of the processes that access the resource
     are programmed correctly.
     Alternate Model of Monitors with Notify and Broadcast
     Hoare's definition of monitors [HOAR74] requires that if there is at least one pro-
     cess in a condition queue, a process from that queue runs immediately when another
     process issues a csignal for that condition. Thus, the process issuing the csignal
     must either immediately exit the monitor or be blocked on the monitor.
         There are two drawbacks to this approach:
     1.  If the process issuing the csignal has not finished with the monitor, then two
         additional process switches are required: one to block this process and another
         to resume it when the monitor becomes available.
     2.  Process scheduling associated with a signal must be perfectly reliable. When
         a csignal is issued, a process from the corresponding condition queue must
         be activated immediately and the scheduler must ensure that no other process

      enters the monitor before activation. Otherwise, the condition under which
      the process was activated could change. For example, in Figure 5.16, when a
      csignal(notempty) is issued, a process from the notempty queue must
      be activated before a new consumer enters the monitor. Another example:
      a producer process may append a character to an empty buffer and then fail
      before signaling; any processes in the notempty queue would be permanently
      hung up.
      Lampson and Redell developed a different definition of monitors for the lan-
guage Mesa [LAMP80]. Their approach overcomes the problems just listed and
supports several useful extensions. The Mesa monitor structure is also used in the
Modula-3 systems programming language [NELS91]. In Mesa, the csignal prim-
itive is replaced by cnotify, with the following interpretation: When a process
executing in a monitor executes cnotify(x), it causes the x condition queue to be
notified, but the signaling process continues to execute. The result of the notifica-
tion is that the process at the head of the condition queue will be resumed at some
convenient future time when the monitor is available. However, because there is
no guarantee that some other process will not enter the monitor before the waiting
process, the waiting process must recheck the condition. For example, the proce-
dures in the boundedbuffer monitor would now have the code of Figure 5.17.
      The if statements are replaced by while loops. Thus, this arrangement results
in at least one extra evaluation of the condition variable. In return, however, there
are no extra process switches, and no constraints on when the waiting process must
run after a cnotify.
      One useful refinement that can be associated with the cnotify primitive is
a watchdog timer associated with each condition primitive. A process that has been
waiting for the maximum timeout interval will be placed in a Ready state regard-
less of whether the condition has been notified. When activated, the process checks
the condition and continues if the condition is satisfied. The timeout prevents the
indefinite starvation of a process in the event that some other process fails before
signaling a condition.
void  append  (char      x)
{
      while   (count     ==     N)  cwait(notfull);       /*  buffer      is   full;  avoid  overflow    */
      buffer[nextin]         =  x;
      nextin   =     (nextin    +   1)  %   N;
      count++;                                                    /*      one  more   item   in  buffer  */
      cnotify(notempty);                                      /*  notify       any  waiting  consumer    */
}
void  take   (char   x)
{
      while   (count     ==     0)  cwait(notempty);  /*  buffer      is  empty;      avoid  underflow   */
      x  =   buffer[nextout];
      nextout     =  (nextout       +   1)  %   N);
      count--;                                                    /*  one      fewer  item   in  buffer  */
      cnotify(notfull);                                       /*  notify       any  waiting  producer    */
}
Figure 5.17   Bounded-Buffer Monitor Code for Mesa Monitor

         With the rule that a process is notified rather than forcibly reactivated, it is
     possible to add a cbroadcast primitive to the repertoire. The broadcast causes all
     processes waiting on a condition to be placed in a Ready state. This is convenient
     in situations where a process does not know how many other processes should be
     reactivated. For example, in the producer/consumer program, suppose that both
     the append and the take functions can apply to variable length blocks of charac-
     ters. In that case, if a producer adds a block of characters to the buffer, it need not
     know how many characters each waiting consumer is prepared to consume. It sim-
     ply issues a cbroadcast and all waiting processes are alerted to try again.
         In addition, a broadcast can be used when a process would have difficulty fig-
     uring out precisely which other process to reactivate. A good example is a memory
     manager. The manager has j bytes free; a process frees up an additional k bytes, but it
     does not know which waiting process can proceed with a total of k + j bytes. Hence it
     uses broadcast, and all processes check for themselves if there is enough memory free.
         An advantage of Lampson/Redell monitors over Hoare monitors is that the
     Lampson/Redell approach is less prone to error. In the Lampson/Redell approach,
     because each procedure checks the monitor variable after being signaled, with the
     use of the while construct, a process can signal or broadcast incorrectly without
     causing an error in the signaled program. The signaled program will check the rel-
     evant variable and, if the desired condition is not met, continue to wait.
         Another advantage of the Lampson/Redell monitor is that it lends itself to a
     more modular approach to program construction. For example, consider the imple-
     mentation of a buffer allocator. There are two levels of conditions to be satisfied for
     cooperating sequential processes:
     1.  Consistent data structures. Thus, the monitor enforces mutual exclusion and
         completes an input or output operation before allowing another operation on
         the buffer.
     2.  Level 1, plus enough memory for this process to complete its allocation request.
         In the Hoare monitor, each signal conveys the level 1 condition but also car-
     ries the implicit message, "I have freed enough bytes for your particular allocate call
     to work now." Thus, the signal implicitly carries the level 2 condition. If the pro-
     grammer later changes the definition of the level 2 condition, it will be necessary to
     reprogram all signaling processes. If the programmer changes the assumptions made
     by any particular waiting process (i.e., waiting for a slightly different level 2 invari-
     ant), it may be necessary to reprogram all signaling processes. This is unmodular and
     likely to cause synchronization errors (e.g., wake up by mistake) when the code is
     modified. The programmer has to remember to modify all procedures in the monitor
     every time a small change is made to the level 2 condition. With a Lampson/Redell
     monitor, a broadcast ensures the level 1 condition and carries a hint that level 2 might
     hold; each process should check the level 2 condition itself. If a change is made in
     the level 2 condition in either a waiter or a signaler, there is no possibility of errone-
     ous wakeup because each procedure checks its own level 2 condition. Therefore, the
     level 2 condition can be hidden within each procedure. With the Hoare monitor,
     the level 2 condition must be carried from the waiter into the code of every signaling
     process, which violates data abstraction and interprocedural modularity principles.

