Message Passing

           When processes interact with one another, two fundamental requirements must
           be satisfied: synchronization and communication. Processes need to be synchro-
           nized to enforce mutual exclusion; cooperating processes may need to exchange
           information. One approach to providing both of these functions is message passing.
           Message passing has the further advantage that it lends itself to implementation in
           distributed systems as well as in shared-memory multiprocessor and uniprocessor
           systems.
                   Message-passing systems come in many forms. In this section, we provide a
           general introduction that discusses features typically found in such systems. The
           actual function of message passing is normally provided in the form of a pair of
           primitives:
                   send      (destination,  message)
                   receive   (source,   message)
                   This is the minimum set of operations needed for processes to engage in mes-
           sage passing. A process sends information in the form of a message to another proc-
           ess designated by a destination. A process receives information by executing the
           receive primitive, indicating the source and the message.
                   A number of design issues relating to message-passing systems are listed in
           Table 5.5, and examined in the remainder of this section.
Table 5.5   Design Characteristics  of  Message  Systems for Interprocess  Communication
            and Synchronization
Synchronization                                  Format
Send                                              Content
           blocking                               Length
           nonblocking                                   fixed
Receive                                                  variable
           blocking
           nonblocking                           Queueing Discipline
           test for arrival                       FIFO
                                                  Priority
Addressing
Direct
           send
           receive
                 explicit
                 implicit
Indirect
           static
           dynamic
           ownership

     Synchronization
     The communication of a message between two processes implies some level of syn-
     chronization between the two: The receiver cannot receive a message until it has
     been sent by another process. In addition, we need to specify what happens to a
     process after it issues a send or receive primitive.
         Consider the send primitive first. When a send primitive is executed in a
     process, there are two possibilities: Either the sending process is blocked until the
     message is received, or it is not. Similarly, when a process issues a receive primi-
     tive, there are two possibilities:
     1.  If a message has previously been sent, the message is received and execution
         continues.
     2.  If there is no waiting message, then either (a) the process is blocked until
         a message arrives, or (b) the process continues to execute, abandoning the
         attempt to receive.
         Thus, both the sender and receiver can be blocking or nonblocking. Three
     combinations are common, although any particular system will usually have only
     one or two combinations implemented:
     ·   Blocking send, blocking receive: Both the sender and receiver are blocked un-
         til the message is delivered; this is sometimes referred to as a rendezvous. This
         combination allows for tight synchronization between processes.
     ·   Nonblocking send, blocking receive: Although the sender may continue on,
         the receiver is blocked until the requested message arrives. This is probably
         the most useful combination. It allows a process to send one or more messages
         to a variety of destinations as quickly as possible. A process that must receive
         a message before it can do useful work needs to be blocked until such a mes-
         sage arrives. An example is a server process that exists to provide a service or
         resource to other processes.
     ·   Nonblocking send, nonblocking receive: Neither party is required to wait.
         The nonblocking send is more natural for many concurrent programming
     tasks. For example, if it is used to request an output operation, such as printing, it
     allows the requesting process to issue the request in the form of a message and then
     carry on. One potential danger of the nonblocking send is that an error could lead
     to a situation in which a process repeatedly generates messages. Because there is no
     blocking to discipline the process, these messages could consume system resources,
     including processor time and buffer space, to the detriment of other processes and
     the OS. Also, the nonblocking send places the burden on the programmer to deter-
     mine that a message has been received: Processes must employ reply messages to
     acknowledge receipt of a message.
         For the receive primitive, the blocking version appears to be more natural
     for many concurrent programming tasks. Generally, a process that requests a mes-
     sage will need the expected information before proceeding. However, if a message
     is lost, which can happen in a distributed system, or if a process fails before it sends
     an anticipated message, a receiving process could be blocked indefinitely. This

problem can be solved by the use of the nonblocking receive. However, the dan-
ger of this approach is that if a message is sent after a process has already executed
a matching receive, the message will be lost. Other possible approaches are to
allow a process to test whether a message is waiting before issuing a receive and
allow a process to specify more than one source in a receive primitive. The latter
approach is useful if a process is waiting for messages from more than one source
and can proceed if any of these messages arrive.
Addressing
Clearly, it is necessary to have a way of specifying in the send primitive which pro-
cess is to receive the message. Similarly, most implementations allow a receiving
process to indicate the source of a message to be received.
The various schemes for specifying processes in send and receive primi-
tives fall into two categories: direct addressing and indirect addressing. With direct
addressing, the send primitive includes a specific identifier of the destination proc-
ess. The receive primitive can be handled in one of two ways. One possibility is
to require that the process explicitly designate a sending process. Thus, the proc-
ess must know ahead of time from which process a message is expected. This will
often be effective for cooperating concurrent processes. In other cases, however,
it is impossible to specify the anticipated source process. An example is a printer-
server process, which will accept a print request message from any other process.
For such applications, a more effective approach is the use of implicit addressing. In
this case, the source parameter of the receive primitive possesses a value returned
when the receive operation has been performed.
The other general approach is indirect addressing. In this case, messages are
not sent directly from sender to receiver but rather are sent to a shared data struc-
ture consisting of queues that can temporarily hold messages. Such queues are gen-
erally referred to as mailboxes. Thus, for two processes to communicate, one proc-
ess sends a message to the appropriate mailbox and the other process picks up the
message from the mailbox.
A strength of the use of indirect addressing is that, by decoupling the sender
and receiver, it allows for greater flexibility in the use of messages. The relationship
between senders and receivers can be one to one, many to one, one to many, or
many to many (Figure 5.18). A one-to-one relationship allows a private communi-
cations link to be set up between two processes. This insulates their interaction from
erroneous interference from other processes. A many-to-one relationship is use-
ful for client/server interaction; one process provides service to a number of other
processes. In this case, the mailbox is often referred to as a port. A one-to-many
relationship allows for one sender and multiple receivers; it is useful for applications
where a message or some information is to be broadcast to a set of processes. A
many-to-many relationship allows multiple server processes to provide concurrent
service to multiple clients.
The association of processes to mailboxes can be either static or dynamic.
Ports are often statically associated with a particular process; that is, the port is
created and assigned to the process permanently. Similarly, a one-to-one relation-
ship is typically defined statically and permanently. When there are many senders,

                                             S1
     S1      Mailbox          R1                                  Port                             R1
                                             Sn
             (a) One to one                                       (b) Many to one
                              R1             S1                                                    R1
     S1      Mailbox                                              Mailbox
                              Rn             Sn                                                    Rn
             (c) One to many                                      (d) Many to many
Figure 5.18  Indirect Process Communication
         the association of a sender to a mailbox may occur dynamically. Primitives such as
         connect and disconnect may be used for this purpose.
             A related issue has to do with the ownership of a mailbox. In the case of a port,
         it is typically owned by and created by the receiving process. Thus, when the process is
         destroyed, the port is also destroyed. For the general mailbox case, the OS may offer
         a create-mailbox service. Such mailboxes can be viewed either as being owned by the
         creating process, in which case they terminate with the process, or as being owned by
         the OS, in which case an explicit command will be required to destroy the mailbox.
         Message Format
         The format of the message depends on the objectives of the messaging facility and
         whether the facility runs on a single computer or on a distributed system. For some
         operating systems, designers have preferred short, fixed-length messages to mini-
         mize processing and storage overhead. If a large amount of data is to be passed, the
         data can be placed in a file and the message then simply references that file. A more
         flexible approach is to allow variable-length messages.
             Figure 5.19 shows a typical message format for operating systems that support
         variable-length messages. The message is divided into two parts: a header, which
         contains information about the message, and a body, which contains the actual con-
         tents of the message. The header may contain an identification of the source and
         intended destination of the message, a length field, and a type field to discriminate
         among various types of messages. There may also be additional control information,

                                                         Message type
                                                         Destination ID
                                           Header        Source ID
                                                         Message length
                                                         Control information
                                               Body      Message contents
                                           Figure 5.19   General Message
                                                         Format
such as a pointer field so that a linked list of messages can be created; a sequence
number, to keep track of the number and order of messages passed between source
and destination; and a priority field.
Queueing Discipline
The simplest queueing discipline is first-in-first-out, but this may not be sufficient
if some messages are more urgent than others. An alternative is to allow the speci-
fying of message priority, on the basis of message type or by designation by the
sender. Another alternative is to allow the receiver to inspect the message queue
and select which message to receive next.
Mutual Exclusion
Figure 5.20 shows one way in which message passing can be used to enforce mutual
exclusion (compare Figures 5.1, 5.2, and 5.6). We assume the use of the blocking
receive primitive and the nonblocking send primitive. A set of concurrent pro-
cesses share a mailbox, box, which can be used by all processes to send and receive.
/*  program      mutualexclusion           */
const  int    n  =   /*  number  of        process   */
void   P(int     i)
{
       message       msg;
       while     (true)      {
             receive     (box,   msg);
             /*  critical       section        */;
             send    (box,      msg);
             /*  remainder      */;
       }
}
void   main()
{
      create     mailbox     (box);
      send   (box,   null);
      parbegin       (P(1),     P(2),...,  P(n));
Figure 5.20      Mutual Exclusion Using              Messages

     The mailbox is initialized to contain a single message with null content. A process
     wishing to enter its critical section first attempts to receive a message. If the mailbox
     is empty, then the process is blocked. Once a process has acquired the message,
     it performs its critical section and then places the message back into the mailbox.
     Thus, the message functions as a token that is passed from process to process.
            The preceding solution assumes that if more than one process performs the
     receive operation concurrently, then:
        ·   If there is a message, it is delivered to only one process and the others are
            blocked, or
        ·   If the message queue is empty, all processes are blocked; when a message is
            available, only one blocked process is activated and given the message.
     These assumptions are true of virtually all message-passing facilities.
            As an example of the use of message passing, Figure 5.21 is a solution to the
     bounded-buffer producer/consumer problem. Using the basic mutual-exclusion
     power of message passing, the problem could have been solved with an algorithmic
     structure similar to that of Figure 5.13. Instead, the program of Figure 5.21 takes
     advantage of the ability of message passing to be used to pass data in addition to
     signals. Two mailboxes are used. As the producer generates data, it is sent as mes-
     sages to the mailbox mayconsume. As long as there is at least one message in that
     mailbox, the consumer can consume. Hence mayconsume serves as the buffer; the
     data in the buffer are organized as a queue of messages. The "size" of the buffer is
     const     int
           capacity           =  /*     buffering  capacity  */  ;
           null     =     /*     empty  message    */  ;
     int   i;
     void     producer()
     {     message        pmsg;
           while       (true)        {
              receive         (mayproduce,pmsg);
              pmsg     =  produce();
              send     (mayconsume,pmsg);
           }
     }
     void     consumer()
     {     message        cmsg;
           while       (true)        {
              receive         (mayconsume,cmsg);
              consume         (cmsg);
              send     (mayproduce,null);
           }
     }
     void     main()
     {
           create_mailbox               (mayproduce);
           create_mailbox               (mayconsume);
           for   (int         i  =   1;i<=  capacity;i++)    send   (mayproduce,null);
           parbegin           (producer,consumer);
     }
     Figure 5.21          A Solution to the Bounded-Buffer Producer/Consumer            Problem  Using  Messages

     determined by the global variable capacity. Initially, the mailbox mayproduce
     is filled with a number of null messages equal to the capacity of the buffer. The
     number of messages in mayproduce shrinks with each production and grows with
     each consumption.
         This approach is quite flexible. There may be multiple producers and consum-
     ers, as long as all have access to both mailboxes. The system may even be distrib-
     uted, with all producer processes and the mayproduce mailbox at one site and all
     the consumer processes and the mayconsume mailbox at another.
