Concurrency: Deadlock and Starvation
CONCURRENCY: DEADLOCK
AND STARVATION
     6.1   Principles of Deadlock
           Reusable Resources
           Consumable Resources
           Resource Allocation Graphs
           The Conditions for Deadlock
     6.2   Deadlock Prevention
           Mutual Exclusion
           Hold and Wait
           No Preemption
           Circular Wait
     6.3   Deadlock Avoidance
           Process Initiation Denial
           Resource Allocation Denial
     6.4   Deadlock Detection
           Deadlock Detection Algorithm
           Recovery
     6.5   An Integrated Deadlock Strategy
     6.6   Dining Philosophers Problem
           Solution Using Semaphores
           Solution Using a Monitor
     6.7   UNIX Concurrency Mechanisms
     6.8   Linux Kernel Concurrency Mechanisms
     6.9   Solaris Thread Synchronization Primitives
     6.10  Windows 7 Concurrency Mechanisms
     6.11  Summary
     6.12  Recommended Reading
     6.13  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
258

        When two trains approach each other at a crossing, both shall come
        to a full stop and neither shall start up again until the other has gone.
        STATUTE PASSED BY THE KANSAS STATE LEGISLATURE, EARLY IN THE 20TH CENTURY
                                                 --A TREASURY OF RAILROAD FOLKLORE,
                                                       B. A. Botkin and Alvin F. Harlow
     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
       List and explain the conditions for deadlock.
       Define deadlock prevention and describe deadlock prevention strategies
        related to each of the conditions for deadlock.
       Explain the difference between deadlock prevention and deadlock avoidance.
       Understand two approaches to deadlock avoidance.
       Explain the fundamental difference in approach between deadlock detection
        and deadlock prevention or avoidance.
       Understand how an integrated deadlock strategy can be designed.
       Analyze the dining philosophers problem.
       Explain the concurrency and synchronization methods used in UNIX, Linux,
        Solaris, and Windows 7.
     This chapter examines two problems that plague all efforts to support concurrent
     processing: deadlock and starvation. We begin with a discussion of the underlying
     principles of deadlock and the related problem of starvation. Then we examine
     the three common approaches to dealing with deadlock: prevention, detection,
     and avoidance. We then look at one of the classic problems used to illustrate
     both synchronization and deadlock issues: the dining philosophers problem.
        As with Chapter 5, the discussion in this chapter is limited to a consideration
     of concurrency and deadlock on a single system. Measures to deal with distributed
     deadlock problems are assessed in Chapter 18. An animation illustrating deadlock
     is available online. Click on the rotating globe at WilliamStallings.com/OS/OS7e.
     html for access.
6.1  PRINCIPLES OF DEADLOCK
     Deadlock can be defined as the permanent blocking of a set of processes that either
     compete for system resources or communicate with each other. A set of processes
     is deadlocked when each process in the set is blocked awaiting an event (typically
     the freeing up of some requested resource) that can only be triggered by another
     blocked process in the set. Deadlock is permanent because none of the events is
     ever triggered. Unlike other problems in concurrent process management, there is
     no efficient solution in the general case.
