Computer System Overview
PART 1 Background
                                      CHAPTER
COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW
1.1  Basic Elements
1.2  Evolution of the Microprocessor
1.3  Instruction Execution
1.4  Interrupts
     Interrupts and the Instruction Cycle
     Interrupt Processing
     Multiple Interrupts
1.5  The Memory Hierarchy
1.6  Cache Memory
     Motivation
     Cache Principles
     Cache Design
1.7  Direct Memory Access
1.8  Multiprocessor and Multicore Organization
     Symmetric Multiprocessors
     Multicore Computers
1.9  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
1.10 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
APPENDIX 1A      Performance Characteristics of Two-Level Memories
     Locality
     Operation of Two-Level Memory
     Performance
                                                                    7

8  CHAPTER 1 / COMPUTER SYSTEM OVERVIEW
           No artifact designed by man is so convenient for this kind of functional
           description as a digital computer. Almost the only ones of its properties
           that are detectable in its behavior are the organizational properties.
           Almost no interesting statement that one can make about on operating
           computer bears any particular relation to the specific nature of the hard-
           ware.A computer is an organization of elementary functional components
           in which, to a high approximation, only the function performed by those
           components is relevant to the behavior of the whole system.
                              THE SCIENCES OF THE ARTIFICIAL, Herbert Simon
        LEARNING OBJECTIVES
        After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
          Describe the basic elements of a computer system and their interrelationship.
          Explain the steps taken by a processor to execute an instruction.
          Understand the concept of interrupts and how and why a processor uses
           interrupts.
          List and describe the levels of a typical computer memory hierarchy.
          Explain the basic characteristics of multiprocessor and multicore organizations.
          Discuss the concept of locality and analyze the performance of a multilevel
           memory hierarchy.
          Understand the operation of a stack and its use to support procedure call and
           return.
        An operating system (OS) exploits the hardware resources of one or more proces-
        sors to provide a set of services to system users. The OS also manages secondary
        memory and I/O (input/output) devices on behalf of its users. Accordingly, it is
        important to have some understanding of the underlying computer system hardware
        before we begin our examination of operating systems.
              This chapter provides an overview of computer system hardware. In most
        areas, the survey is brief, as it is assumed that the reader is familiar with this subject.
        However, several areas are covered in some detail because of their importance to
        topics covered later in the book. Further topics are covered in Appendix C.
   1.1  BASIC ELEMENTS
        At a top level, a computer consists of processor, memory, and I/O components, with
        one or more modules of each type. These components are interconnected in some
        fashion to achieve the main function of the computer, which is to execute programs.
        Thus, there are four main structural elements:
             Processor: Controls the operation of the computer and performs its data pro-
              cessing functions. When there is only one processor, it is often referred to as
              the central processing unit (CPU).
