Deadlock Detection
6.4  DEADLOCK DETECTION
     Deadlock prevention strategies are very conservative; they solve the problem
     of deadlock by limiting access to resources and by imposing restrictions on pro-
     cesses. At the opposite extreme, deadlock detection strategies do not limit resource
     access or restrict process actions. With deadlock detection, requested resources are
     granted to processes whenever possible. Periodically, the OS performs an algorithm
     that allows it to detect the circular wait condition described earlier in condition (4)
     and illustrated in Figure 6.6.
     Deadlock Detection Algorithm
     A check for deadlock can be made as frequently as each resource request or,
     less frequently, depending on how likely it is for a deadlock to occur. Checking
     at each resource request has two advantages: It leads to early detection, and the
     algorithm is relatively simple because it is based on incremental changes to the
     state of the system. On the other hand, such frequent checks consume consider-
     able processor time.
         A common algorithm for deadlock detection is one described in [COFF71].
     The Allocation matrix and Available vector described in the previous section are
     used. In addition, a request matrix Q is defined such that Qij represents the amount
     of resources of type j requested by process i. The algorithm proceeds by marking
     processes that are not deadlocked. Initially, all processes are unmarked. Then the
     following steps are performed:
     1.  Mark each process that has a row in the Allocation matrix of all zeros.
     2.  Initialize a temporary vector W to equal the Available vector.
     3.  Find an index i such that process i is currently unmarked and the ith row of Q
         is less than or equal to W. That is, Qik ... Wk, for 1 ... k ... m. If no such row is
         found, terminate the algorithm.
     4.  If such a row is found, mark process i and add the corresponding row of the
         allocation matrix to W. That is, set Wk = Wk + Aik, for 1 ... k ... m. Return
         to step 3.
         A deadlock exists if and only if there are unmarked processes at the end of
     the algorithm. Each unmarked process is deadlocked. The strategy in this algo-
     rithm is to find a process whose resource requests can be satisfied with the available
     resources, and then assume that those resources are granted and that the process
     runs to completion and releases all of its resources. The algorithm then looks for
     another process to satisfy. Note that this algorithm does not guarantee to prevent
     deadlock; that will depend on the order in which future requests are granted. All
     that it does is determine if deadlock currently exists.
         We can use Figure 6.10 to illustrate the deadlock detection algorithm. The
     algorithm proceeds as follows:
     1.  Mark P4, because P4 has no allocated resources.
     2.  Set W = (0 0 0 0 1).

    R1  R2   R3   R4      R5             R1  R2     R3  R4        R5  R1  R2  R3  R4        R5
P1  0   1    0    0       1    P1        1   0      1   1         0   2   1   1   2         1
P2  0   0    1    0       1    P2        1   1      0   0         0       Resource vector
P3  0   0    0    0       1    P3        0   0      0   1         0
P4  1   0    1    0       1    P4        0   0      0   0         0
        Request matrix Q                     Allocation matrix A      R1  R2  R3  R4        R5
                                                                      0   0   0   0         1
                                                                          Available vector
Figure 6.10  Example      for  Deadlock  Detection
3.  The request of process P3 is less than or equal to W, so mark P3 and set
                               W = W + (0 0 0 1 0) = (0 0 0 1 1).
4.  No other unmarked process has a row in Q that is less than or equal to W.
    Therefore, terminate the algorithm.
    The algorithm concludes with P1 and P2 unmarked, indicating that these
processes are deadlocked.
Recovery
Once deadlock has been detected, some strategy is needed for recovery. The follow-
ing are possible approaches, listed in order of increasing sophistication:
1.  Abort all deadlocked processes. This is, believe it or not, one of the most
    common, if not the most common, solution adopted in operating systems.
2.  Back up each deadlocked process to some previously defined checkpoint, and
    restart all processes. This requires that rollback and restart mechanisms be built
    in to the system. The risk in this approach is that the original deadlock may
    recur. However, the nondeterminancy of concurrent processing may ensure that
    this does not happen.
3.  Successively abort deadlocked processes until deadlock no longer exists. The
    order in which processes are selected for abortion should be on the basis of
    some criterion of minimum cost. After each abortion, the detection algorithm
    must be reinvoked to see whether deadlock still exists.
4.  Successively preempt resources until deadlock no longer exists. As in (3), a cost-
    based selection should be used, and reinvocation of the detection algorithm is
    required after each preemption. A process that has a resource preempted from
    it must be rolled back to a point prior to its acquisition of that resource.
    For (3) and (4), the selection criteria could be one of the following. Choose the
process with the
   least amount of processor time consumed so far
   least amount of output produced so far
   most estimated time remaining

      least total resources allocated so far
      lowest priority
        Some of these quantities are easier to measure than others. Estimated time
     remaining is particularly suspect. Also, other than by means of the priority measure,
     there is no indication of the "cost" to the user, as opposed to the cost to the system
     as a whole.
6.5  AN INTEGRATED DEADLOCK STRATEGY
     As Table 6.1 suggests, there are strengths and weaknesses to all of the strategies for
     dealing with deadlock. Rather than attempting to design an OS facility that employs
     only one of these strategies, it might be more efficient to use different strategies in
     different situations. [HOWA73] suggests one approach:
       Group resources into a number of different resource classes.
       Use the linear ordering strategy defined previously for the prevention of circular
        wait to prevent deadlocks between resource classes.
       Within a resource class, use the algorithm that is most appropriate for that class.
        As an example of this technique, consider the following classes of resources:
       Swappable space: Blocks of memory on secondary storage for use in swapping
        processes
       Process resources: Assignable devices, such as tape drives, and files
       Main memory: Assignable to processes in pages or segments
       Internal resources: Such as I/O channels
        The order of the preceding list represents the order in which resources are
     assigned. The order is a reasonable one, considering the sequence of steps that a
     process may follow during its lifetime. Within each class, the following strategies
     could be used:
       Swappable space: Prevention of deadlocks by requiring that all of the required
        resources that may be used be allocated at one time, as in the hold-and-wait
        prevention strategy. This strategy is reasonable if the maximum storage
        requirements are known, which is often the case. Deadlock avoidance is also a
        possibility.
       Process resources: Avoidance will often be effective in this category, because
        it is reasonable to expect processes to declare ahead of time the resources that
        they will require in this class. Prevention by means of resource ordering within
        this class is also possible.
       Main memory: Prevention by preemption appears to be the most appropriate
        strategy for main memory. When a process is preempted, it is simply swapped
        to secondary memory, freeing space to resolve the deadlock.
       Internal resources: Prevention by means of resource ordering can be used.
