 we begin our discussion by looking at the operating system's role in the overall computer system. a computer system can be divided roughly into four components the hardware the operating system the application programs and the users figure . . chapter introduction i user user user i i i compiler assembler text editor database system system and application programs operating system computer hardware figure . abstract view of the components of a computer system. the hardware the central processing unit cpu the memory and the input output i o devices provides the basic computing resources for the system. the application programs such as word processors spreadsheets compilers and web browsers define the ways in which these resources are used to solve users' computing problems. the operating system controls and coordinates the use of the hardware among the various application programs for the various users. we can also view a computer system as consisting of hardware software and data. the operating system provides the means for proper use of these resources in the operation of the computer system. an operating system is similar to a government. like a government it performs no useful function by itself. it simply provides an environment within which other programs can do useful work. to understand more fully the operating system's role we next explore operating systems from two viewpoints that of the user and that of the system. . . user view the user's view of the computer varies according to the interface being used. most computer users sit in front of a pc consisting of a monitor keyboard mouse and system unit. such a system is designed for one user to monopolize its resources. the goal is to maximize the work or play that the user is performing. in this case the operating system is designed mostly for ease of use with some attention paid to performance and none paid to resource utilization how various hardware and software resources are shared. performance is of course important to the user but rather than resource utilization such systems are optimized for the single user experience. . what operating systems do in other cases a user sits at a terminal connected to a mainframe or minicomputer. other users are accessing the same computer through other terminals. these users share resources and may exchange information. the operating system in such cases is designed to maximize resource utilization to assure that all available cpu time memory and i o are used efficiently and that no individual user takes more than her fair share. in still other cases users sit at workstations connected to networks of other workstations and servers. these users have dedicated resources at their disposal but they also share resources such as networking and servers file compute and print servers. therefore their operating system is designed to compromise between individual usability and resource utilization. recently many varieties of handheld computers have come into fashion. most of these devices are standalone units for individual users. some are connected to networks either directly by wire or more often through wireless modems and networking. because of power speed and interface limitations they perform relatively few remote operations. their operating systems are designed mostly for individual usability but performance per amount of battery life is important as well. some computers have little or no user view. for example embedded computers in home devices and automobiles may have numeric keypads and may turn indicator lights on or off to show status but they and their operating systems are designed primarily to run without user intervention. . . system view from the computer's point of view the operating system is the program most intimately involved with the hardware. in this context we can view an operating system as a resource allocator. a computer system has many resources that may be required to solve a problem cpu time memory space file storage space i o devices and so on. the operating system acts as the manager of these resources. facing numerous and possibly conflicting requests for resources the operating system must decide how to allocate them to specific programs and users so that it can operate the computer system efficiently and fairly. as we have seen resource allocation is especially important where many users access the same mainframe or minicomputer. a slightly different view of an operating system emphasizes the need to control the various i o devices and user programs. an operating system is a control program. a control program manages the execution of user programs to prevent errors and improper use of the computer. it is especially concerned with the operation and control of i o devices. . . defining operating systems we have looked at the operating system's role from the views of the user and of the system. how though can we define what an operating system is? in general we have no completely adequate definition of an operating system. operating systems exist because they offer a reasonable way to solve the problem of creating a usable computing system. the fundamental goal of computer systems is to execute user programs and to make solving user problems easier. toward this goal computer hardware is constructed. since bare hardware alone is not particularly easy to use application programs are chapter introduction developed. these programs require certain common operations such as those controlling the i o devices. the common functions of controlling and allocating resources are then brought together into one piece of software the operating system. in addition we have no universally accepted definition of what is part of the operating system. a simple viewpoint is that it includes everything a vendor ships when you order the operating system. the features included however vary greatly across systems. some systems take up less than megabyte of space and lack even a full screen editor whereas others require gigabytes of space and are entirely based on graphical windowing systems. a kilobyte or kb is bytes a megabyte or mb is l bytes and a gigabyte or gb is l bytes. computer manufacturers often round off these numbers and say that a megabyte is million bytes and a gigabyte is billion bytes. a more common definition is that the operating system is the one program running at all times on the computer usually called the kernel with all else being systems programs and application programs. this last definition is the one that we generally follow. the matter of what constitutes an operating system has become increasingly important. in the united states department of justice filed suit against microsoft in essence claiming that microsoft included too much functionality in its operating systems and thus prevented application vendors from competing. for example a web browser was an integral part of the operating system. as a result microsoft was found guilty of using its operating system monopoly to limit competition