An Integrated Deadlock Strategy
278  CHAPTER 6 / CONCURRENCY: DEADLOCK AND STARVATION
      least total resources allocated so far
      lowest priority
        Some of these quantities are easier to measure than others. Estimated time
     remaining is particularly suspect. Also, other than by means of the priority measure,
     there is no indication of the "cost" to the user, as opposed to the cost to the system
     as a whole.
6.5  AN INTEGRATED DEADLOCK STRATEGY
     As Table 6.1 suggests, there are strengths and weaknesses to all of the strategies for
     dealing with deadlock. Rather than attempting to design an OS facility that employs
     only one of these strategies, it might be more efficient to use different strategies in
     different situations. [HOWA73] suggests one approach:
       Group resources into a number of different resource classes.
       Use the linear ordering strategy defined previously for the prevention of circular
        wait to prevent deadlocks between resource classes.
       Within a resource class, use the algorithm that is most appropriate for that class.
        As an example of this technique, consider the following classes of resources:
       Swappable space: Blocks of memory on secondary storage for use in swapping
        processes
       Process resources: Assignable devices, such as tape drives, and files
       Main memory: Assignable to processes in pages or segments
       Internal resources: Such as I/O channels
        The order of the preceding list represents the order in which resources are
     assigned. The order is a reasonable one, considering the sequence of steps that a
     process may follow during its lifetime. Within each class, the following strategies
     could be used:
       Swappable space: Prevention of deadlocks by requiring that all of the required
        resources that may be used be allocated at one time, as in the hold-and-wait
        prevention strategy. This strategy is reasonable if the maximum storage
        requirements are known, which is often the case. Deadlock avoidance is also a
        possibility.
       Process resources: Avoidance will often be effective in this category, because
        it is reasonable to expect processes to declare ahead of time the resources that
        they will require in this class. Prevention by means of resource ordering within
        this class is also possible.
       Main memory: Prevention by preemption appears to be the most appropriate
        strategy for main memory. When a process is preempted, it is simply swapped
        to secondary memory, freeing space to resolve the deadlock.
       Internal resources: Prevention by means of resource ordering can be used.

                                          6.6 / DINING PHILOSOPHERS PROBLEM                  279
6.6  DINING PHILOSOPHERS PROBLEM
     We now turn to the dining philosophers problem, introduced by Dijkstra [DIJK71].
     Five philosophers live in a house, where a table is laid for them. The life of each phi-
     losopher consists principally of thinking and eating, and through years of thought,
     all of the philosophers had agreed that the only food that contributed to their think-
     ing efforts was spaghetti. Due to a lack of manual skill, each philosopher requires
     two forks to eat spaghetti.
     The eating arrangements are simple (Figure 6.11): a round table on which is
     set a large serving bowl of spaghetti, five plates, one for each philosopher, and five
     forks. A philosopher wishing to eat goes to his or her assigned place at the table
     and, using the two forks on either side of the plate, takes and eats some spaghetti.
     The problem: Devise a ritual (algorithm) that will allow the philosophers to eat. The
     algorithm must satisfy mutual exclusion (no two philosophers can use the same fork
     at the same time) while avoiding deadlock and starvation (in this case, the term has
     literal as well as algorithmic meaning!).
     This problem may not seem important or relevant in itself. However, it does
     illustrate basic problems in deadlock and starvation. Furthermore, attempts to
     develop solutions reveal many of the difficulties in concurrent programming (e.g.,
     see [GING90]). In addition, the dining philosophers problem can be seen as repre-
     sentative of problems dealing with the coordination of shared resources, which may
                                                P2
                                  P3                    P1
                                      P4            P0
     Figure 6.11  Dining Arrangement for Philosophers
