 an operating system is software that manages the computer hardware as well as providing an environment for application programs to run. perhaps the most visible aspect of an operating system is the interface to the computer system it provides to the human user. for a computer to do its job of executing programs the programs must be in main memory. main memory is the only large storage area that the processor can access directly. it is an array of words or bytes ranging in size from millions to billions. each word in memory has its own address. the main memory is usually a volatile storage device that loses its contents when power is turned off or lost. most computer systems provide secondary storage as an extension of main memory. secondary storage provides a form of non volatile storage that is capable of holding large quantities of data permanently. the most common secondary storage device is a magnetic disk which provides storage of both programs and data. the wide variety of storage systems in a computer system can be organized in a hierarchy according to speed and cost. the higher levels are expensive but they are fast. as we move down the hierarchy the cost per bit generallydecreases whereas the access time generally increases. there are several different strategies for designing a computer system. uniprocessor systems have only a single processor while multiprocessor systems contain two or more processors that share physical memory and peripheral devices. the most common multiprocessor design is symmetric multiprocessing or smp where all processors are considered peers and run . summary independently of one another. clustered systems are a specialized form of multiprocessor systems and consist of multiple computer systems connected by a local area network. to best utilize the cpu modern operating systems employ multiprogramming which allows several jobs to be in memory at the same time thus ensuring the cpu always has a job to execute. timesharing systems are an extension of multiprogramming whereby cpu scheduling algorithms rapidly switch between jobs thus providing the illusion each job is running concurrently. the operating system must ensure correct operation of the computer system. to prevent user programs from interfering with the proper operation of the system the hardware has two modes user mode and kernel mode. various instructions such as i o instructions and halt instructions are privileged and can be executed only in kernel mode. the memory in which the operating system resides must also be protected from modification by the user. a timer prevents infinite loops. these facilities dual mode privileged instructions memory protection and timer interrupt are basic building blocks used by operating systems to achieve correct operation. a process or job is the fundamental unit of work in an operating system. process management includes creating and deleting processes and providing mechanisms for processes to communicate and synchronize with another. an operating system manages memory by keeping track of what parts of memory are being used and by whom. the operating system is also responsible for dynamically allocating and freeing memory space. storage space is also managed by the operating system and this includes providing file systems for representing files and directories and managing space on mass storage devices. operating systems must also be concerned with protecting and securing the operating system and users. protection are mechanisms that control the access of processes or users to the resources made available by the computer system. security measures are responsible for defending a computer system from external or internal attacks. distributed systems allow users to share resources on geographically dispersed hosts connected via a computer network. services may be provided through either the client server model or the peer to peer model. in a clustered system multiple machines can perform computations on data residing on shared storage and computing can continue even when some subset of cluster members fails. lans and wans are the two basic types of networks. lans enable processors distributed over a small geographical area to communicate whereas wans allow processors distributed over a larger area to communicate. lans typically are faster than wans. there are several computer systems that serve specific purposes. these include real time operating systems designed for embedded environments such as consumer devices automobiles and robotics. real time operating systems have well defined fixed time constraints. processing must be done within the defined constraints or the system will fail. multimedia systems involve the delivery of multimedia data and often have special requirements of displaying or playing audio video or synchronized audio and video streams. recently the influence of the internet and the world wide web has encouraged the development of modern operating systems that include web browsers and networking and communication software as integral features. chapter introduction exercises . in a multiprogramming and time sharing environment several users share the system simultaneously. this situation can result in various security problems. a. what are two such problems? b. can we ensure the same degree of security in a time shared machine as in a dedicated machine? explain your answer. . the issue of resource utilization shows up in different forms in different types of operating systems. list what resources must be managed carefully in the following settings a. mainframe or minicomputer systems b. workstations connected to servers c. handheld computers . under what circumstances would a user be better off using a timesharing system rather than a pc or single user workstation? . which of the functionalities listed below need to be supported by the operating system for the following two settings a handheld devices and b real time systems. a. batch programming b. virtual memory c. time sharing . describe the differences between symmetric and asymmetric multiprocessing. what are three advantages and one disadvantage of multiprocessor systems? . how do clustered systems differ from multiprocessor systems? what is required for two machines belonging to a cluster to cooperate to provide a highly available service? . distinguish between the client server and peer to peer models of distributed systems. . consider a computing cluster consisting of two nodes running a database. describe two ways in which the cluster software can manage access to the data on the disk. discuss the benefits and disadvantages of each. . how are network computers different from traditional personal com puters? describe some usage scenarios in which it is advantageous to use network computers. . what is the purpose of interrupts? what are the differences between a trap and an interrupt? can traps be generated intentionally by a user program? if so for what purpose? exercises . direct memory access is used for high speed i o devices in order to avoid increasing the cpu's execution load. a. how does the cpu interface with the device to coordinate the transfer? b. how does the cpu know when the memory operations are complete? c. the cpu is allowed to execute other programs while the dma controller is transferring data. does this process interfere with the execution of the user programs? if so describe what forms of interference are caused. . some computer systems do not provide a privileged mode of operation in hardware. is it possible to construct a secure operating system for these computer systems? give arguments both that it is and that it is not possible. . give two reasons why caches are useful. what problems do they solve? what problems do they cause? if a cache can be made as large as the device for which it is caching for instance a cache as large as a disk why not make it that large and eliminate the device? . discuss with examples how the problem of maintaining coherence of cached data manifests itself in the following processing environments a. single processor systems b. multiprocessor systems c. distributed systems . describe a mechanism for enforcing memory protection in order to prevent a program from modifying the memory associated with other programs. . what network configuration would best suit the following environments? a. a dormitory floor b. a university campus c. a state d. a nation . define the essential properties of the following types of operating systems a. batch b. interactive c. time sharing d. real time e. network chapter introduction f. parallel g. distributed h. clustered i. handheld . what are the tradeoffs inherent in handheld computers? bibliographical notes brookshear provides an overview of computer science in general. an overview of the linux operating system is presented in bovet and cesati . solomon and russinovich give an overview of microsoft windows and considerable technical detail about the system internals and components. mauro and mcdougall cover the solaris operating system. mac os x is presented at http www.apple.com macosx. coverage of peer to peer systems includes parameswaran et al. gong ripeanu et al. agre balakrisfrnan et al. and loo . a discussion on peer to peer file sharing systems can be found in lee . a good coverage of cluster computing is presented by buyya . recent advances in cluster computing are described by ahmed . a survey of issues relating to operating systems support for distributed systems can be found in tanenbaum and van renesse . many general textbooks cover operating systems including stallings b nutt and tanenbaum . hamacher et al. describes computer organization. hennessy and patterson provide coverage of i o systems and buses and of system architecture in general. cache memories including associative memory are described and analyzed by smith . that paper also includes an extensive bibliography on the subject. discussions concerning magnetic disk technology are presented by freedman and by harker et al. . optical disks are covered by kenville fujitani o'leary and kitts gait and olsen and kenley . discussions of floppy disks are offered by pechura and schoeffler and by sarisky . general discussions concerning mass storage technology are offered by chi and by hoagland . kurose and ross tanenbaum peterson and davie and halsall provide general overviews of computer networks. fortier presents a detailed discussion of networking hardware and software. wolf discusses recent developments in developing embedded systems. issues related to handheld devices can be found in myers and beigl and di pietro and mancini 