Security Issues
     · The desired physical address is the sum of the starting physical address of the
     segment plus the offset.
     In our example, we have the logical address 0001001011110000, which is
     segment number 1, offset 752. Suppose that this segment is residing in main mem-
     ory starting at physical address 0010000000100000. Then the physical address is
     0010000000100000 + 001011110000  0010001100010000 (Figure 7.12b).
     To summarize, with simple segmentation, a process is divided into a number
     of segments that need not be of equal size. When a process is brought in, all of its
     segments are loaded into available regions of memory, and a segment table is set up.
7.5  SECURITY ISSUES
     Main memory and virtual memory are system resources subject to security threats
     and for which security countermeasures need to be taken. The most obvious secu-
     rity requirement is the prevention of unauthorized access to the memory contents
     of processes. If a process has not declared a portion of its memory to be sharable,
     then no other process should have access to the contents of that portion of memory.
     If a process declares that a portion of memory may be shared by other designated
     processes, then the security service of the OS must ensure that only the designated
     processes have access. The security threats and countermeasures discussed in
     Chapter 3 are relevant to this type of memory protection.
     In this section, we summarize another threat that involves memory protection.
     Part Seven provides more detail.
     Buffer Overflow Attacks
     One serious security threat related to memory management remains to be intro-
     duced: buffer overflow, also known as a buffer overrun, which is defined in the NIST
     (National Institute of Standards and Technology) Glossary of Key Information
     Security Terms as follows:
     buffer overrun: A condition at an interface under which more input can be
     placed into a buffer or data-holding area than the capacity allocated, overwrit-
     ing other information. Attackers exploit such a condition to crash a system or to
     insert specially crafted code that allows them to gain control of the system.
     A buffer overflow can occur as a result of a programming error when a process
     attempts to store data beyond the limits of a fixed-sized buffer and consequently
     overwrites adjacent memory locations. These locations could hold other program
     variables or parameters or program control flow data such as return addresses
     and pointers to previous stack frames. The buffer could be located on the stack,
     in the heap, or in the data section of the process. The consequences of this error
     include corruption of data used by the program, unexpected transfer of control in
     the program, possibly memory access violations, and very likely eventual program

       termination. When done deliberately as part of an attack on a system, the transfer
       of control could be to code of the attacker's choosing, resulting in the ability to
       execute arbitrary code with the privileges of the attacked process. Buffer overflow
       attacks are one of the most prevalent and dangerous types of security attacks.
             To illustrate the basic operation of a common type of buffer overflow,
       known as stack overflow, consider the C main function given in Figure 7.13a. This
       contains three variables (valid, str1, and str2),2 whose values will typically
       be saved in adjacent memory locations. Their order and location depends on the
       type of variable (local or global), the language and compiler used, and the target
       machine architecture. For this example, we assume that they are saved in consecu-
       tive memory locations, from highest to lowest, as shown in Figure 7.14.3 This is
       typically the case for local variables in a C function on common processor archi-
       tectures such as the Intel Pentium family. The purpose of the code fragment is to
       call the function next_tag(str1) to copy into str1 some expected tag value.
int    main(int     argc,  char  *argv[])         {
       int   valid  =  FALSE;
       char  str1[8];
       char  str2[8];
       next_tag(str1);
       gets(str2);
       if    (strncmp(str1,    str2,      8)  ==     0)
             valid  =  TRUE;
       printf("buffer1: str1(%s), str2(%s),              valid(%d)\n",             str1,  str2,  valid);
}
                                 (a) Basic buffer overflow C code
$  cc  -g    -o  buffer1   buffer1.c
$  ./buffer1
START
buffer1:     str1(START),      str2(START),          valid(1)
$  ./buffer1
EVILINPUTVALUE
buffer1:     str1(TVALUE),       str2(EVILINPUTVALUE),                   valid(0)
$  ./buffer1
BADINPUTBADINPUT
buffer1:     str1(BADINPUT),     str2(BADINPUTBADINPUT),                 valid(1)
                               (b) Basic buffer overflow example runs
Figure 7.13  Basic Buffer Overflow Example
       2In this example, the flag variable is saved as an integer rather than a Boolean. This is done both because
       it is the classic C style and to avoid issues of word alignment in its storage. The buffers are deliberately
       small to accentuate the buffer overflow issue being illustrated.
       3Address and data values are specified in hexadecimal in this and related figures. Data values are also
       shown in ASCII where appropriate.

     Memory       Before                              After                    Contains
     Address      gets             (str2)             gets             (str2)  Value      of
     ....         ....                                ....
     bffffbf4     34fcffbf                            34fcffbf                            argv
                  4...                                3...
     bffffbf0     01000000                            01000000                            argc
                  ....                                ....
     bffffbec     c6bd0340                            c6bd0340                 return     addr
                  ...@                                ...@
     bffffbe8     08fcffbf                            08fcffbf                 old  base  ptr
                  ....                                ....
     bffffbe4     00000000                            01000000                         valid
                  ....                                ....
     bffffbe0     80640140                            00640140
                  .d.@                                .d.@
     bffffbdc     54001540                            4e505554                      str1[4-7]
                  T..@                                NPUT
     bffffbd8     53544152                            42414449                      str1[0-3]
                  STAR                                BADI
     bffffbd4     00850408                            4e505554                      str2[4-7]
                  ....                                NPUT
     bffffbd0     30561540                            42414449                      str2[0-3]
                  0v.@                                BADI
     ....         ....                                ....
     Figure 7.14  Basic Buffer Overflow Stack Values
     Let's assume this will be the string START. It then reads the next line from the
     standard input for the program using the C library gets() function, and then
     compares the string read with the expected tag. If the next line did indeed contain
     just the string START, this comparison would succeed, and the variable valid would
     be set to TRUE.4 This case is shown in the first of the three example program runs
     in Figure 7.13b. Any other input tag would leave it with the value FALSE. Such a
     code fragment might be used to parse some structured network protocol interac-
     tion or formatted text file.
     The problem with this code exists because the traditional C library gets()
     function does not include any checking on the amount of data copied. It reads the
     next line of text from the program's standard input up until the first newline5 char-
     acter occurs and copies it into the supplied buffer followed by the NULL terminator
     4In C the logical values FALSE and TRUE are simply integers with the values 0 and 1 (or indeed any
     nonzero value), respectively. Symbolic defines are often used to map these symbolic names to their
     underlying value, as was done in this program.
     5The newline (NL) or linefeed (LF) character is the standard end of line terminator for UNIX systems,
     and hence for C, and is the character with the ASCII value 0x0a.

used with C strings.6 If more than seven characters are present on the input line,
when read in they will (along with the terminating NULL character) require more
room than is available in the str2 buffer. Consequently, the extra characters will
overwrite the values of the adjacent variable, str1 in this case. For example, if the
input line contained EVILINPUTVALUE, the result will be that str1 will be over-
written with the characters TVALUE, and str2 will use not only the eight characters
allocated to it but seven more from str1 as well. This can be seen in the second
example run in Figure 7.13b. The overflow has resulted in corruption of a variable
not directly used to save the input. Because these strings are not equal, valid also
retains the value FALSE. Further, if 16 or more characters were input, additional
memory locations would be overwritten.
    The preceding example illustrates the basic behavior of a buffer overflow. At
its simplest, any unchecked copying of data into a buffer could result in corruption
of adjacent memory locations, which may be other variables, or possibly program
control addresses and data. Even this simple example could be taken further.
Knowing the structure of the code processing it, an attacker could arrange for the
overwritten value to set the value in str1 equal to the value placed in str2, result-
ing in the subsequent comparison succeeding. For example, the input line could
be the string BADINPUTBADINPUT. This results in the comparison succeeding, as
shown in the third of the three example program runs in Figure 7.13b, and illus-
trated in Figure 7.14, with the values of the local variables before and after the call
to gets(). Note also that the terminating NULL for the input string was written to
the memory location following str1. This means the flow of control in the program
will continue as if the expected tag was found, when in fact the tag read was some-
thing completely different. This will almost certainly result in program behavior
that was not intended. How serious this is depends very much on the logic in the
attacked program. One dangerous possibility occurs if instead of being a tag, the
values in these buffers were an expected and supplied password needed to access
privileged features. If so, the buffer overflow provides the attacker with a means of
accessing these features without actually knowing the correct password.
    To exploit any type of buffer overflow, such as those we have illustrated here,
the attacker needs:
1.  To identify a buffer overflow vulnerability in some program that can be trig-
    gered using externally sourced data under the attackers control, and
2.  To understand how that buffer will be stored in the processes memory, and
    hence the potential for corrupting adjacent memory locations and potentially
    altering the flow of execution of the program.
    Identifying vulnerable programs may be done by inspection of program source,
tracing the execution of programs as they process oversized input, or using tools
such as fuzzing, which we discuss in Part Seven, to automatically identify potentially
6Strings in C are stored in an array of characters and terminated with the NULL character, which has the
ASCII value 0x00. Any remaining locations in the array are undefined, and typically contain whatever
value was previously saved in that area of memory. This can be clearly seen in the value in the variable
str2 in the "Before" column of Figure 7.14.

     vulnerable programs. What the attacker     does with the resulting corruption             of
     memory varies considerably, depending on   what values are being overwritten.
     Defending against Buffer Overflows
     Finding and exploiting a stack buffer overflow is not that difficult. The large num-
     ber of exploits over the previous couple of decades clearly illustrates this. There
     is consequently a need to defend systems against such attacks by either prevent-
     ing them or at least detecting and aborting such attacks. Countermeasures can be
     broadly classified into two categories:
     ·  Compile-time defenses, which aim to harden programs to resist attacks in new
        programs
     ·  Run-time defenses, which aim to detect and abort attacks in existing programs
        While suitable defenses have been known for a couple of decades, the very
     large existing base of vulnerable software and systems hinders their deployment.
     Hence the interest in run-time defenses, which can be deployed in operating
     systems and updates and can provide some protection for existing vulnerable
     programs.
7.6  SUMMARY
     One of the most important and complex tasks of an operating system is memory
     management. Memory management involves treating main memory as a resource
     to be allocated to and shared among a number of active processes. To use the pro-
     cessor and the I/O facilities efficiently, it is desirable to maintain as many processes
     in main memory as possible. In addition, it is desirable to free programmers from
     size restrictions in program development.
        The basic tools of memory management are paging and segmentation. With
     paging, each process is divided into relatively small, fixed-size pages. Segmentation
     provides for the use of pieces of varying size. It is also possible to combine segmen-
     tation and paging in a single memory management scheme.
7.7  RECOMMENDED READING
     Because partitioning has been supplanted by virtual memory techniques, most OS
     books offer only cursory coverage. One of the more complete and interesting treat-
     ments is in [MILE92]. A thorough discussion of partitioning strategies is found in
     [KNUT97].
        The topics of linking and loading are covered in many books on program
     development, computer architecture, and operating systems. A particularly detailed
     treatment is [BECK97]. [CLAR98] also contains a good discussion. A thorough
     practical discussion of this topic, with numerous OS examples, is [LEVI00].
