 an operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs. it provides certain services to programs and to the users of those programs. the specific services provided of course differ from one operating system to another but we can identify common classes. these operating system services are provided for the convenience of the programmer to make the programming task easier. chapter operating system structures one set of operating system services provides functions that are helpful to the user. user interface. almost all operating systems have a user interface ui . this interface can take several forms. one is a command line interface cli which uses text commands and a method for entering them say a program to allow entering and editing of commands . another is a batch interface in which commands and directives to control those commands are entered into files and those files are executed. most commonly a graphical user interface gui is used. here the interface is a window system with a pointing device to direct i o choose from menus and make selections and a keyboard to enter text. some systems provide two or all three of these variations. program execution. the system must be able to load a program into memory and to run that program. the program must be able to end its execution either normally or abnormally indicating error . i o operations. a running program may require i o which may involve a file or an i o device. for specific devices special functions may be desired such as recording to a cd or dvd drive or blanking a crt screen . for efficiency and protection users usually cannot control i o devices directly. therefore the operating system must provide a means to do i o. file system manipulation. the file system is of particular interest. obviously programs need to read and write files and directories. they also need to create and delete them by name search for a given file and list file information. finally some programs include permissions management to allow or deny access to files or directories based on file ownership. communications. there are many circumstances in which one process needs to exchange information with another process. such communication may occur between processes that are executing on the same computer or between processes that are executing on different computer systems tied together by a computer network. communications may be implemented via shared memory or through message passing in which packets of information are moved between processes by the operating system. error detection. the operating system needs to be constantly aware of possible errors. errors may occur in the cpu and memory hardware such as a memory error or a power failure in i o devices such as a parity error on tape a connection failure on a network or lack of paper in the printer and in the user program such as an arithmetic overflow an attempt to access an illegal memory location or a too great use of cpu time . for each type of error the operating system should take the appropriate action to ensure correct and consistent computing. debugging facilities can greatly enhance the user's and programmer's abilities to use the system efficiently. another set of operating system functions exists not for helping the user but rather for ensuring the efficient operation of the system itself. systems with multiple users can gain efficiency by sharing the computer resources among the users