Linux Memory Management
     Initial value of Di is 0
     After an operation, the value of Di is updated as follows
     (I) if the next operation is a block allocate request:
        if there is any free block, select one to allocate
                  if the selected block is locally free
                      then Di : Di  2
                      else Di : Di  1
        otherwise
                  first get two blocks by splitting a larger one into two (recursive operation)
                  allocate one and mark the other locally free
                  Di remains unchanged (but D may change for other block sizes because
                               of the recursive call)
     (II) if the next operation is a block free request
        Case Di  2
              mark it locally free and free it locally
              Di  2
        Case Di  1
              mark it globally free and free it globally; coalesce if possible
              Di  0
        Case Di  0
              mark it globally free and free it globally; coalesce if possible
              select one locally free block of size 2i and free it globally; coalesce  if  possible
              Di : 0
     Figure 8.24  Lazy Buddy System Algorithm
8.4  LINUX MEMORY MANAGEMENT
     Linux shares many of the characteristics of the memory management schemes of
     other UNIX implementations but has its own unique features. Overall, the Linux
     memory management scheme is quite complex [DUBE98]. In this section, we give
     a brief overview of the two main aspects of Linux memory management: process
     virtual memory and kernel memory allocation.
     Linux Virtual Memory
     VIRTUAL      MEMORY  ADDRESSING   Linux makes use of a three-level page table
     structure, consisting of the following types of tables (each individual table is the size
     of one page):
     ·  Page directory: An active process has a single page directory that is the size
        of one page. Each entry in the page directory points to one page of the page
        middle directory. The page directory must be in main memory for an active
        process.

·  Page middle directory: The page middle directory may span multiple pages.
   Each entry in the page middle directory points to one page in the page table.
·  Page table: The page table may also span multiple pages. Each page table
   entry refers to one virtual page of the process.
   To use this three-level page table structure, a virtual address in Linux is viewed
as consisting of four fields (Figure 8.25). The leftmost (most significant) field is used
as an index into the page directory. The next field serves as an index into the page
middle directory. The third field serves as an index into the page table. The fourth
field gives the offset within the selected page of memory.
   The Linux page table structure is platform independent and was designed to
accommodate the 64-bit Alpha processor, which provides hardware support for
three levels of paging. With 64-bit addresses, the use of only two levels of pages on
the Alpha would result in very large page tables and directories. The 32-bit Pentium/
x86 architecture has a two-level hardware paging mechanism. The Linux software
accommodates the two-level scheme by defining the size of the page middle direc-
tory as one. Note that all references to an extra level of indirection are optimized
away at compile time, not at run time. Therefore, there is no performance overhead
for using generic three-level design on platforms which support only two levels in
hardware.
PAGE ALLOCATION        To enhance the efficiency of reading in and writing out pages
to and from main memory, Linux defines a mechanism for dealing with contiguous
blocks of pages mapped into contiguous blocks of page frames. For this purpose,
the buddy system is used. The kernel maintains a list of contiguous page frame
groups of fixed size; a group may consist of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 page frames. As pages
                                        Virtual address
     Global directory        Middle directory            Page table              Offset
                                                                                 
                                                                     Page table
                                        Page middle                                      Page frame
                                        directory                                        in physical
                                                                                         memory
                       Page
                       directory
                                  
cr3          
register
Figure 8.25    Address Translation  in  Linux Virtual Memory Scheme

     are allocated and deallocated in main memory, the available groups are split and
     merged using the buddy algorithm.
     PAGE  REPLACEMENT        ALGORITHM  The Linux page replacement algorithm is
     based on the clock algorithm described in Section 8.2 (see Figure 8.16). In the
     simple clock algorithm, a use bit and a modify bit are associated with each page
     in main memory. In the Linux scheme, the use bit is replaced with an 8-bit age
     variable. Each time that a page is accessed, the age variable is incremented. In
     the background, Linux periodically sweeps through the global page pool and
     decrements the age variable for each page as it rotates through all the pages
     in main memory. A page with an age of 0 is an "old" page that has not been
     referenced in some time and is the best candidate for replacement. The larger
     the value of age, the more frequently a page has been used in recent times and
     the less eligible it is for replacement. Thus, the Linux algorithm is a form of least
     frequently used policy.
     Kernel Memory Allocation
     The Linux kernel memory capability manages physical main memory page frames.
     Its primary function is to allocate and deallocate frames for particular uses. Possible
     owners of a frame include user-space processes (i.e., the frame is part of the virtual
     memory of a process that is currently resident in real memory), dynamically allo-
     cated kernel data, static kernel code, and the page cache.7
           The foundation of kernel memory allocation for Linux is the page allocation
     mechanism used for user virtual memory management. As in the virtual memory
     scheme, a buddy algorithm is used so that memory for the kernel can be allocated
     and deallocated in units of one or more pages. Because the minimum amount of
     memory that can be allocated in this fashion is one page, the page allocator alone
     would be inefficient because the kernel requires small short-term memory chunks
     in odd sizes. To accommodate these small chunks, Linux uses a scheme known as
     slab allocation [BONW94] within an allocated page. On a Pentium/x86 machine, the
     page size is 4 Kbytes, and chunks within a page may be allocated of sizes 32, 64, 128,
     252, 508, 2,040, and 4,080 bytes.
           The slab allocator is relatively complex and is not examined in detail here; a
     good description can be found in [VAHA96]. In essence, Linux maintains a set of
     linked lists, one for each size of chunk. Chunks may be split and aggregated in a
     manner similar to the buddy algorithm and moved between lists accordingly.
8.5  WINDOWS MEMORY MANAGEMENT
     The Windows virtual memory manager controls how memory is allocated and how
     paging is performed. The memory manager is designed to operate over a vari-
     ety of platforms and to use page sizes ranging from 4 Kbytes to 64 Kbytes. Intel
     7The page cache has properties similar to a disk buffer, described in this chapter, as well as a disk cache,
     described in Chapter 11. We defer a discussion of the Linux page cache to Chapter 11.
