Windows Memory Management
386  CHAPTER 8 / VIRTUAL MEMORY
     are allocated and deallocated in main memory, the available groups are split and
     merged using the buddy algorithm.
     PAGE  REPLACEMENT        ALGORITHM  The Linux page replacement algorithm is
     based on the clock algorithm described in Section 8.2 (see Figure 8.16). In the
     simple clock algorithm, a use bit and a modify bit are associated with each page
     in main memory. In the Linux scheme, the use bit is replaced with an 8-bit age
     variable. Each time that a page is accessed, the age variable is incremented. In
     the background, Linux periodically sweeps through the global page pool and
     decrements the age variable for each page as it rotates through all the pages
     in main memory. A page with an age of 0 is an "old" page that has not been
     referenced in some time and is the best candidate for replacement. The larger
     the value of age, the more frequently a page has been used in recent times and
     the less eligible it is for replacement. Thus, the Linux algorithm is a form of least
     frequently used policy.
     Kernel Memory Allocation
     The Linux kernel memory capability manages physical main memory page frames.
     Its primary function is to allocate and deallocate frames for particular uses. Possible
     owners of a frame include user-space processes (i.e., the frame is part of the virtual
     memory of a process that is currently resident in real memory), dynamically allo-
     cated kernel data, static kernel code, and the page cache.7
           The foundation of kernel memory allocation for Linux is the page allocation
     mechanism used for user virtual memory management. As in the virtual memory
     scheme, a buddy algorithm is used so that memory for the kernel can be allocated
     and deallocated in units of one or more pages. Because the minimum amount of
     memory that can be allocated in this fashion is one page, the page allocator alone
     would be inefficient because the kernel requires small short-term memory chunks
     in odd sizes. To accommodate these small chunks, Linux uses a scheme known as
     slab allocation [BONW94] within an allocated page. On a Pentium/x86 machine, the
     page size is 4 Kbytes, and chunks within a page may be allocated of sizes 32, 64, 128,
     252, 508, 2,040, and 4,080 bytes.
           The slab allocator is relatively complex and is not examined in detail here; a
     good description can be found in [VAHA96]. In essence, Linux maintains a set of
     linked lists, one for each size of chunk. Chunks may be split and aggregated in a
     manner similar to the buddy algorithm and moved between lists accordingly.
8.5  WINDOWS MEMORY MANAGEMENT
     The Windows virtual memory manager controls how memory is allocated and how
     paging is performed. The memory manager is designed to operate over a vari-
     ety of platforms and to use page sizes ranging from 4 Kbytes to 64 Kbytes. Intel
     7The page cache has properties similar to a disk buffer, described in this chapter, as well as a disk cache,
     described in Chapter 11. We defer a discussion of the Linux page cache to Chapter 11.

                                   8.5 / WINDOWS MEMORY MANAGEMENT                    387
and AMD64 platforms have 4 Kbytes per page and Intel Itanium platforms have
8 Kbytes per page.
Windows Virtual Address Map
On 32-bit platforms, each Windows user process sees a separate 32-bit address space,
allowing 4 Gbytes of virtual memory per process. By default, half of this memory is
reserved for the OS, so each user actually has 2 Gbytes of available virtual address
space and all processes share most of the upper 2 Gbytes of system space when
running in kernel-mode. Large memory intensive applications, on both clients and
servers, can run more effectively using 64-bit Windows. Other than netbooks, most
modern PCs use the AMD64 processor architecture which is capable of running as
either a 32-bit or 64-bit system.
   Figure 8.26 shows the default virtual address space seen by a normal 32-bit
user process. It consists of four regions:
  0x00000000 to 0x0000FFFF: Set aside to help programmers catch NULL-
   pointer assignments.
  0x00010000 to 0x7FFEFFFF: Available user address space. This space is
   divided into pages that may be loaded into main memory.
   64-Kbyte region for             0
   NULL-pointer assignments
   (inaccessible)
                                            2-Gbyte user
                                            address space
                                            (unreserved, usable)
   64-Kbyte region for
   bad-pointer assignments
   (inaccessible)
                                            2-Gbyte region for
                                            the operating system
                                            (inaccessible)
                         0xFFFFFFFF
   Figure 8.26           Windows Default 32-Bit Virtual Address Space

388  CHAPTER 8 / VIRTUAL MEMORY
       0x7FFF0000   to       0x7FFFFFFF:      A  guard  page  inaccessible  to    the  user.
        This page makes it easier for the OS to check on out-of-bounds pointer
        references.
       0x80000000 to 0xFFFFFFFF: System address space. This 2-Gbyte process is
        used for the Windows Executive, Kernel, HAL, and device drivers.
       On 64-bit platforms, 8 Tbytes of user address space is available in Windows 7.
     Windows Paging
     When a process is created, it can in principle make use of the entire user space of
     almost 2 Gbytes (or 8 Tbytes on 64-bit Windows). This space is divided into fixed-
     size pages, any of which can be brought into main memory, but the OS manages the
     addresses in contiguous regions allocated on 64-Kbyte boundaries. A region can be
     in one of three states:
       Available: addresses not currently used by this process.
       Reserved: addresses that the virtual memory manager has set aside for a proc-
        ess so they cannot be allocated to another use (e.g., saving contiguous space
        for a stack to grow).
       Committed: addresses that the virtual memory manager has initialized for use
        by the process to access virtual memory pages. These pages can reside either
        on disk or in physical memory. When on disk they can be either kept in files
        (mapped pages) or occupy space in the paging file (i.e., the disk file to which it
        writes pages when removing them from main memory).
        The distinction between reserved and committed memory is useful because
     it (1) reduces the amount of total virtual memory space needed by the system,
     allowing the page file to be smaller; and (2) allows programs to reserve addresses
     without making them accessible to the program or having them charged against
     their resource quotas.
        The resident set management scheme used by Windows is variable allocation,
     local scope (see Table 8.5). When a process is first activated, it is assigned data struc-
     tures to manage its working set. As the pages needed by the process are brought
     into physical memory the memory manager uses the data structures to keep track
     of the pages assigned to the process. Working sets of active processes are adjusted
     using the following general conventions:
       When main memory is plentiful, the virtual memory manager allows the resi-
        dent sets of active processes to grow. To do this, when a page fault occurs, a
        new physical page is added to the process but no older page is swapped out,
        resulting in an increase of the resident set of that process by one page.
       When memory becomes scarce, the virtual memory manager recovers mem-
        ory for the system by removing less recently used pages out of the working sets
        of active processes, reducing the size of those resident sets.
       Even when memory is plentiful, Windows watches for large processes that
        are rapidly increasing their memory usage. The system begins to remove

                                                                   8.6 / SUMMARY            389
        pages that have not been recently used from the process. This policy makes
        the system more responsive because a new program will not suddenly cause a
        scarcity of memory and make the user wait while the system tries to reduce the
        resident sets of the processes that are already running.
8.6  SUMMARY
     To use the processor and the I/O facilities efficiently, it is desirable to maintain as
     many processes in main memory as possible. In addition, it is desirable to free pro-
     grammers from size restrictions in program development.
        The way to address both of these concerns is virtual memory. With virtual
     memory, all address references are logical references that are translated at run time
     to real addresses. This allows a process to be located anywhere in main memory
     and for that location to change over time. Virtual memory also allows a process to
     be broken up into pieces. These pieces need not be contiguously located in main
     memory during execution and, indeed, it is not even necessary for all of the pieces
     of the process to be in main memory during execution.
        Two basic approaches to providing virtual memory are paging and segmen-
     tation. With paging, each process is divided into relatively small, fixed-size pages.
     Segmentation provides for the use of pieces of varying size. It is also possible to
     combine segmentation and paging in a single memory management scheme.
        A virtual memory management scheme requires both hardware and software
     support. The hardware support is provided by the processor. The support includes
     dynamic translation of virtual addresses to physical addresses and the generation
     of an interrupt when a referenced page or segment is not in main memory. Such an
     interrupt triggers the memory management software in the OS.
        A number of design issues relate to OS support for memory management:
       Fetch policy: Process pages can be brought in on demand, or a prepaging pol-
        icy can be used, which clusters the input activity by bringing in a number of
        pages at once.
       Placement policy: With a pure segmentation system, an incoming segment
        must be fit into an available space in memory.
       Replacement policy: When memory is full, a decision must be made as to
        which page or pages are to be replaced.
       Resident set management: The OS must decide how much main memory to
        allocate to a particular process when that process is swapped in. This can be a
        static allocation made at process creation time, or it can change dynamically.
       Cleaning policy: Modified process pages can be written out at the time of
        replacement, or a precleaning policy can be used, which clusters the output
        activity by writing out a number of pages at once.
       Load control: Load control is concerned with determining the number of
        processes that will be resident in main memory at any given time.
