Uniprocessor Scheduling
                                    CHAPTER
UNIPROCESSOR SCHEDULING
9.1  Types of Processor Scheduling
     Long-Term Scheduling
     Medium-Term Scheduling
     Short-Term Scheduling
9.2  Scheduling Algorithms
     Short-Term Scheduling Criteria
     The Use of Priorities
     Alternative Scheduling Policies
     Performance Comparison
     Fair-Share Scheduling
9.3  Traditional UNIX Scheduling
9.4  Summary
9.5  Recommended Reading
9.6  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                395

              I take a two hour nap, from one o'clock to four.
                                                                                             --Yogi Berra
           LEARNING OBJECTIVES
           After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
           ·    Explain the differences among long-, medium-, and short-term scheduling.
           ·    Assess the performance of different scheduling policies.
           ·    Understand the scheduling technique used in traditional UNIX.
           In a multiprogramming system, multiple processes exist concurrently in main
           memory. Each process alternates between using a processor and waiting for
           some event to occur, such as the completion of an I/O operation. The processor
           or processors are kept busy by executing one process while the others wait.
                The key to multiprogramming is scheduling. In fact, four types of schedul-
           ing are typically involved (Table 9.1). One of these, I/O scheduling, is more conven-
           iently addressed in Chapter 11, where I/O is discussed. The remaining three types of
           scheduling, which are types of processor scheduling, are addressed in this chapter and
           the next.
                This chapter begins with an examination of the three types of processor
           scheduling, showing how they are related. We see that long-term scheduling and
           medium-term scheduling are driven primarily by performance concerns related
           to the degree of multiprogramming. These issues are dealt with to some extent
           in Chapter 3 and in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8. Thus, the remainder of this
           chapter concentrates on short-term scheduling and is limited to a consideration of
           scheduling on a uniprocessor system. Because the use of multiple processors adds
           additional complexity, it is best to focus on the uniprocessor case first, so that the
           differences among scheduling algorithms can be clearly seen.
                Section 9.2 looks at the various algorithms that may be used to make short-
           term scheduling decisions. A set of animations that illustrate concepts in this chap-
           ter is available online. Click on the rotating globe at WilliamStallings.com/OS/OS7e.
           html for access.
Table 9.1  Types of Scheduling
Long-term scheduling            The decision to add to the pool of processes to be executed
Medium-term scheduling          The decision to add to the number of processes that are partially or fully in
                                main memory
Short-term scheduling           The decision as to which available process will be executed by the processor
I/O scheduling                  The decision as to which process's pending I/O request shall be handled by
                                an available I/O device

                 New
     Long-term                Long-term
     scheduling               scheduling
     Ready/                   Ready                        Running              Exit
     suspend     Medium-term                Short-term
                 scheduling                 scheduling
     Blocked/                 Blocked
     suspend     Medium-term
                 scheduling
     Figure 9.1  Scheduling and Process State Transitions
9.1  TYPES OF PROCESSOR SCHEDULING
     The aim of processor scheduling is to assign processes to be executed by the proces-
     sor or processors over time, in a way that meets system objectives, such as response
     time, throughput, and processor efficiency. In many systems, this scheduling activity is
     broken down into three separate functions: long-, medium-, and short-term scheduling.
     The names suggest the relative time scales with which these functions are performed.
     Figure 9.1 relates the scheduling functions to the process state transition diagram
     (first shown in Figure 3.9b). Long-term scheduling is performed when a new process
     is created. This is a decision whether to add a new process to the set of processes that
     are currently active. Medium-term scheduling is a part of the swapping function. This
     is a decision whether to add a process to those that are at least partially in main mem-
     ory and therefore available for execution. Short-term scheduling is the actual decision
     of which ready process to execute next. Figure 9.2 reorganizes the state transition
     diagram of Figure 3.9b to suggest the nesting of scheduling functions.
     Scheduling affects the performance of the system because it determines
     which processes will wait and which will progress. This point of view is presented in
     Figure 9.3, which shows the queues involved in the state transitions of a process.1
     Fundamentally, scheduling is a matter of managing queues to minimize queueing
     delay and to optimize performance in a queueing environment.
     Long-Term Scheduling
     The long-term scheduler determines which programs are admitted to the system for
     processing. Thus, it controls the degree of multiprogramming. Once admitted, a job
     1For simplicity, Figure 9.3 shows new processes going directly to the Ready state, whereas Figures 9.1 and
     9.2 show the option of either the Ready state or the Ready/Suspend state.
