Types of Processor Scheduling
                                       9.1  / TYPES OF     PROCESSOR            SCHEDULING                       397
                 New
     Long-term                Long-term
     scheduling               scheduling
     Ready/                   Ready                        Running              Exit
     suspend     Medium-term                Short-term
                 scheduling                 scheduling
     Blocked/                 Blocked
     suspend     Medium-term
                 scheduling
     Figure 9.1  Scheduling and Process State Transitions
9.1  TYPES OF PROCESSOR SCHEDULING
     The aim of processor scheduling is to assign processes to be executed by the proces-
     sor or processors over time, in a way that meets system objectives, such as response
     time, throughput, and processor efficiency. In many systems, this scheduling activity is
     broken down into three separate functions: long-, medium-, and short-term scheduling.
     The names suggest the relative time scales with which these functions are performed.
     Figure 9.1 relates the scheduling functions to the process state transition diagram
     (first shown in Figure 3.9b). Long-term scheduling is performed when a new process
     is created. This is a decision whether to add a new process to the set of processes that
     are currently active. Medium-term scheduling is a part of the swapping function. This
     is a decision whether to add a process to those that are at least partially in main mem-
     ory and therefore available for execution. Short-term scheduling is the actual decision
     of which ready process to execute next. Figure 9.2 reorganizes the state transition
     diagram of Figure 3.9b to suggest the nesting of scheduling functions.
     Scheduling affects the performance of the system because it determines
     which processes will wait and which will progress. This point of view is presented in
     Figure 9.3, which shows the queues involved in the state transitions of a process.1
     Fundamentally, scheduling is a matter of managing queues to minimize queueing
     delay and to optimize performance in a queueing environment.
     Long-Term Scheduling
     The long-term scheduler determines which programs are admitted to the system for
     processing. Thus, it controls the degree of multiprogramming. Once admitted, a job
     1For simplicity, Figure 9.3 shows new processes going directly to the Ready state, whereas Figures 9.1 and
     9.2 show the option of either the Ready state or the Ready/Suspend state.

398  CHAPTER 9 / UNIPROCESSOR SCHEDULING
                                Running
                                Ready
                                Blocked
                                Short term
                                Blocked,
                                suspend
                                Ready,
                                suspend
                                Medium term
                                Long term
                           New                   Exit
     Figure 9.2            Levels of Scheduling
     or user program becomes a process and is added to the queue for the short-term
     scheduler. In some systems, a newly created process begins in a swapped-out condi-
     tion, in which case it is added to a queue for the medium-term scheduler.
     In a batch system, or for the batch portion of an OS, newly submitted jobs are
     routed to disk and held in a batch queue. The long-term scheduler creates processes
     from the queue when it can. There are two decisions involved. The scheduler must
     decide when the OS can take on one or more additional processes. And the scheduler
     must decide which job or jobs to accept and turn into processes. We briefly consider
     these two decisions.
     The decision as to when to create a new process is generally driven by the
     desired degree of multiprogramming. The more processes that are created, the
     smaller is the percentage of time that each process can be executed (i.e., more proc-
     esses are competing for the same amount of processor time). Thus, the long-term
     scheduler may limit the degree of multiprogramming to provide satisfactory service

                                 9.1 / TYPES OF PROCESSOR SCHEDULING                                             399
            Long-term                                           Timeout
            scheduling
Batch                            Ready queue                    Short-term               Release
jobs                                                            scheduling  Processor
                                 Medium-term
                                 scheduling
            Interactive          Ready, suspend queue
            users
                                                                            Medium-term
                                                                            scheduling
                                 Blocked, suspend queue
                                 Blocked queue
                         Event                                           Event wait
                         occurs
Figure 9.3  Queueing Diagram for Scheduling
       to the current set of processes. Each time a job terminates, the scheduler may decide
       to add one or more new jobs. Additionally, if the fraction of time that the processor
       is idle exceeds a certain threshold, the long-term scheduler may be invoked.
            The decision as to which job to admit next can be on a simple first-come-
       first-served (FCFS) basis, or it can be a tool to manage system performance. The
       criteria used may include priority, expected execution time, and I/O requirements.
       For example, if the information is available, the scheduler may attempt to keep a
       mix of processor-bound and I/O-bound processes.2 Also, the decision can depend
       on which I/O resources are to be requested, in an attempt to balance I/O usage.
            For interactive programs in a time-sharing system, a process creation request can
       be generated by the act of a user attempting to connect to the system. Time-sharing
       users are not simply queued up and kept waiting until the system can accept them.
       Rather, the OS will accept all authorized comers until the system is saturated, using
       some predefined measure of saturation. At that point, a connection request is met
       with a message indicating that the system is full and the user should try again later.
       Medium-Term Scheduling
       Medium-term scheduling is part of the swapping function. The issues involved are
       discussed in Chapters 3, 7, and 8. Typically, the swapping-in decision is based on
       the need to manage the degree of multiprogramming. On a system that does not
       2A process is regarded as processor bound if it mainly performs computational work and occasionally
       uses I/O devices. A process is regarded as I/O bound if the time it takes to execute the process depends
       primarily on the time spent waiting for I/O operations.

400  CHAPTER 9 / UNIPROCESSOR SCHEDULING
     use virtual memory, memory management is also an issue. Thus, the swapping-in
     decision will consider the memory requirements of the swapped-out processes.
     Short-Term Scheduling
     In terms of frequency of execution, the long-term scheduler executes relatively
     infrequently and makes the coarse-grained decision of whether or not to take on
     a new process and which one to take. The medium-term scheduler is executed
     somewhat more frequently to make a swapping decision. The short-term scheduler,
     also known as the dispatcher, executes most frequently and makes the fine-grained
     decision of which process to execute next.
        The short-term scheduler is invoked whenever an event occurs that may lead
     to the blocking of the current process or that may provide an opportunity to preempt
     a currently running process in favor of another. Examples of such events include:
       Clock interrupts
       I/O interrupts
       Operating system calls
       Signals (e.g., semaphores)
9.2  SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS
     Short-Term Scheduling Criteria
     The main objective of short-term scheduling is to allocate processor time in such
     a way as to optimize one or more aspects of system behavior. Generally, a set of
     criteria is established against which various scheduling policies may be evaluated.
        The commonly used criteria can be categorized along two dimensions. First,
     we can make a distinction between user-oriented and system-oriented criteria. User-
     oriented criteria relate to the behavior of the system as perceived by the individual
     user or process. An example is response time in an interactive system. Response
     time is the elapsed time between the submission of a request until the response
     begins to appear as output. This quantity is visible to the user and is naturally of
     interest to the user. We would like a scheduling policy that provides "good" serv-
     ice to various users. In the case of response time, a threshold may be defined, say
     two seconds. Then a goal of the scheduling mechanism should be to maximize the
     number of users who experience an average response time of two seconds or less.
        Other criteria are system oriented. That is, the focus is on effective and
     efficient utilization of the processor. An example is throughput, which is the rate
     at which processes are completed. This is certainly a worthwhile measure of sys-
     tem performance and one that we would like to maximize. However, it focuses on
     system performance rather than service provided to the user. Thus, throughput is of
     concern to a system administrator but not to the user population.
        Whereas user-oriented criteria are important on virtually all systems, system-
     oriented criteria are generally of minor importance on single-user systems. On a
     single-user system, it probably is not important to achieve high processor utilization
