Recommended Reading
                                                 9.5 / RECOMMENDED READING                  425
        A variety of criteria are used in designing the short-term scheduler. Some of
     these criteria relate to the behavior of the system as perceived by the individual user
     (user oriented), while others view the total effectiveness of the system in meeting
     the needs of all users (system oriented). Some of the criteria relate specifically to
     quantitative measures of performance, while others are more qualitative in nature.
     From a user's point of view, response time is generally the most important char-
     acteristic of a system, while from a system point of view, throughput or processor
     utilization is important.
        A variety of algorithms have been developed for making the short-term sched-
     uling decision among all ready processes:
       First-come-first-served: Select the process that has been waiting the longest
        for service.
       Round robin: Use time slicing to limit any running process to a short burst of
        processor time, and rotate among all ready processes.
       Shortest process next: Select the process with the shortest expected processing
        time, and do not preempt the process.
       Shortest remaining time: Select the process with the shortest expected remain-
        ing process time. A process may be preempted when another process becomes
        ready.
       Highest response ratio next: Base the scheduling decision on an estimate of
        normalized turnaround time.
       Feedback: Establish a set of scheduling queues and allocate processes to
        queues based on execution history and other criteria.
        The choice of scheduling algorithm will depend on expected performance and
     on implementation complexity.
9.5  RECOMMENDED READING
     Virtually  every  textbook   on  operating  systems  covers  scheduling.  Rigorous
     queueing analyses of various scheduling policies are presented in [KLEI04] and
     [CONW67]. [DOWD93] provides an instructive performance analysis of various
     scheduling algorithms.
     CONW67     Conway, R., Maxwell, W., and Miller, L. Theory of Scheduling. Reading,
        MA: Addison-Wesley, 1967. Reprinted by Dover Publications, 2003.
     DOWD93     Dowdy, L., and Lowery, C. P.S. to Operating Systems. Upper Saddle River,
        NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993.
     KLEI04     Kleinrock, L. Queuing Systems, Volume Three: Computer Applications. New
        York: Wiley, 2004.

426  CHAPTER 9 / UNIPROCESSOR SCHEDULING
9.6       KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
arrival rate                     medium-term scheduler                  short-term scheduler
dispatcher                       multilevel feedback                    throughput
exponential averaging            predictability                         time slicing
fair-share scheduling            residence time                         turnaround time
fairness                         response time                          utilization
first-come-first-served          round robin                            waiting time
first-in-first-out               scheduling priority
long-term scheduler              service time
          Review Questions
          9.1       Briefly describe the three types of processor scheduling.
          9.2       What is usually the critical performance requirement in an interactive operating
                    system?
          9.3       What is the difference between turnaround time and response time?
          9.4       For process scheduling, does a low-priority value represent a low priority or a high
                    priority?
          9.5       What is the difference between preemptive and nonpreemptive scheduling?
          9.6       Briefly define FCFS scheduling.
          9.7       Briefly define round-robin scheduling.
          9.8       Briefly define shortest-process-next scheduling.
          9.9       Briefly define shortest-remaining-time scheduling.
          9.10      Briefly define highest-response-ratio-next scheduling.
          9.11      Briefly define feedback scheduling.
          Problems
          9.1       Consider the following workload:
                        Process  Burst Time              Priority       Arrival Time
                         P1      50 ms                      4                  0 ms
                         P2      20 ms                      1                  20 ms
                         P3      100 ms                     3                  40 ms
                         P4      40 ms                      2                  60 ms
                    a.  Show the schedule using shortest remaining time, nonpreemptive priority (a
                        smaller priority number implies higher priority) and round robin with quantum
                        30 ms. Use time scale diagram as shown below for the FCFS example to show the
                        schedule for each requested scheduling policy.
