Multiprocessor and Real-Time Scheduling
MULTIPROCESSOR AND
REAL-TIME SCHEDULING
     10.1   Multiprocessor Scheduling
            Granularity
            Design Issues
            Process Scheduling
            Thread Scheduling
     10.2   Real-Time Scheduling
            Background
            Characteristics of Real-Time Operating Systems
            Real-Time Scheduling
            Deadline Scheduling
            Rate Monotonic Scheduling
            Priority Inversion
     10.3   Linux Scheduling
     10.4   UNIX SVR4 Scheduling
     10.5   UNIX FreeBSD Scheduling
     10.6   Windows Scheduling
     10.7   Linux Virtual Machine Process Scheduling
     10.8   Summary
     10.9   Recommended Reading
     10.10  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
430                                                         430

         Bear in mind, Sir Henry, one of the phrases in that queer old legend
         which Dr. Mortimer has read to us, and avoid the moor in those hours
         of darkness when the powers of evil are exalted.
                     --THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES, Arthur Conan Doyle
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
           Understand the concept of thread granularity.
           Discuss the key design issues in multiprocessor thread scheduling and some
            of the key approaches to scheduling.
           Understand the requirements imposed by real-time scheduling.
           Explain the scheduling methods used in Linux, UNIX SVR4, and Windows 7.
      This chapter continues our survey of process and thread scheduling. We begin with
      an examination of issues raised by the availability of more than one processor. A
      number of design issues are explored. This is followed by a look at the scheduling of
      processes on a multiprocessor system. Then the somewhat different design consid-
      erations for multiprocessor thread scheduling are examined. The second section of
      this chapter covers real-time scheduling. The section begins with a discussion of the
      characteristics of real-time processes and then looks at the nature of the schedul-
      ing process. Two approaches to real-time scheduling, deadline scheduling and rate
      monotonic scheduling, are examined.
10.1  MULTIPROCESSOR SCHEDULING
      When a computer system contains more than a single processor, several new issues
      are introduced into the design of the scheduling function. We begin with a brief
      overview of multiprocessors and then look at the rather different considerations
      when scheduling is done at the process level and at the thread level.
            We can classify multiprocessor systems as follows:
           Loosely coupled or distributed multiprocessor, or cluster: Consists of a col-
            lection of relatively autonomous systems, each processor having its own main
            memory and I/O channels. We address this type of configuration in Chapter 16.
           Functionally specialized processors: An example is an I/O processor. In this
            case, there is a master, general-purpose processor; specialized processors are
            controlled by the master processor and provide services to it. Issues relating to
            I/O processors are addressed in Chapter 11.
           Tightly coupled multiprocessor: Consists of a set of processors that share a
            common main memory and are under the integrated control of an operating
            system.
