I/O Management and Disk Scheduling

     11.1   I/O Devices
     11.2   Organization of the I/O Function
            The Evolution of the I/O Function
            Direct Memory Access
     11.3   Operating System Design Issues
            Design Objectives
            Logical Structure of the I/O Function
     11.4   I/O Buffering
            Single Buffer
            Double Buffer
            Circular Buffer
            The Utility of Buffering
     11.5   Disk Scheduling
            Disk Performance Parameters
            Disk Scheduling Policies
     11.6   RAID
     11.7   Disk Cache
            Design Considerations
            Performance Considerations
     11.8   UNIX SVR4 I/O
     11.9   Linux I/O
     11.10  Windows I/O
     11.11  Summary
     11.12  Recommended Reading
     11.13  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
474

         An artifact can be thought of as a meeting point--an"interface"in today's
         terms between an "inner" environment, the substance and organization
         of the artifact itself, and an "outer" environment, the surroundings in
         which it operates. If the inner environment is appropriate to the outer
         environment, or vice versa, the artifact will serve its intended purpose.
                                    --THE SCIENCES OF THE ARTIFICIAL, Herbert Simon
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
      ·  Summarize key categories of I/O devices on computers.
      ·  Discuss the organization of the I/O function.
      ·  Explain some of the key issues in the design of OS support for I/O.
      ·  Analyze the performance implications of various I/O buffering alternatives.
      ·  Understand the performance issues involved in magnetic disk access.
      ·  Explain the concept of RAID and describe the various levels.
      ·  Understand the performance implications of disk cache.
      ·  Describe the I/O mechanisms in UNIX, Linux, and Windows 7.
      Perhaps the messiest aspect of operating system design is input/output. Because
      there is such a wide variety of devices and applications of those devices, it is difficult
      to develop a general, consistent solution.
            We begin with a brief discussion of I/O devices and the organization of the I/O
      function. These topics, which generally come within the scope of computer architec-
      ture, set the stage for an examination of I/O from the point of view of the OS.
            The next section examines operating system design issues, including design
      objectives, and the way in which the I/O function can be structured. Then I/O
      buffering is examined; one of the basic I/O services provided by the operating system
      is a buffering function, which improves overall performance.
            The next sections of the chapter are devoted to magnetic disk I/O. In contemporary
      systems, this form of I/O is the most important and is key to the performance as per-
      ceived by the user. We begin by developing a model of disk I/O performance and then
      examine several techniques that can be used to enhance performance.
            Appendix J summarizes characteristics of secondary storage devices, includ-
      ing magnetic disk and optical memory. A set of animations that illustrate concepts
      in this chapter is available online. Click on the rotating globe at WilliamStallings.
      com/OS/OS7e.html for access.
