Organization of the I/O Function
        Unit of transfer: Data may be transferred as a stream of bytes or characters
         (e.g., terminal I/O) or in larger blocks (e.g., disk I/O).
        Data representation: Different data encoding schemes are used by different
         devices, including differences in character code and parity conventions.
        Error conditions: The nature of errors, the way in which they are reported,
         their consequences, and the available range of responses differ widely from
         one device to another.
         This diversity makes a uniform and consistent approach to I/O, both from the
      point of view of the operating system and from the point of view of user processes,
      difficult to achieve.
11.2  ORGANIZATION OF THE I/O FUNCTION
      Appendix C summarizes three techniques for performing I/O:
        Programmed I/O: The processor issues an I/O command, on behalf of a process,
         to an I/O module; that process then busy waits for the operation to be completed
         before proceeding.
        Interrupt-driven I/O: The processor issues an I/O command on behalf of
         a process. There are then two possibilities. If the I/O instruction from the
         process is nonblocking, then the processor continues to execute instruc-
         tions from the process that issued the I/O command. If the I/O instruction
         is blocking, then the next instruction that the processor executes is from
         the OS, which will put the current process in a blocked state and schedule
         another process.
        Direct memory access (DMA): A DMA module controls the exchange of data
         between main memory and an I/O module. The processor sends a request for
         the transfer of a block of data to the DMA module and is interrupted only
         after the entire block has been transferred.
         Table 11.1 indicates the relationship among these three techniques. In most
      computer systems, DMA is the dominant form of transfer that must be supported
      by the operating system.
      The Evolution of the I/O Function
      As computer systems have evolved, there has been a pattern of increasing
      complexity and sophistication of individual components. Nowhere is this more
Table 11.1  I/O Techniques
                                 No Interrupts         Use of Interrupts
I/O-to-Memory Transfer through   Programmed I/O        Interrupt-driven I/O
Processor
Direct I/O-to-Memory Transfer                          Direct memory access (DMA)

     evident than in the I/O function. The evolutionary steps can be summarized as
     follows:
     1.  The processor directly controls a peripheral device. This is seen in simple
         microprocessor-controlled devices.
     2.  A controller or I/O module is added. The processor uses programmed I/O
         without interrupts. With this step, the processor becomes somewhat divorced
         from the specific details of external device interfaces.
     3.  The same configuration as step 2 is used, but now interrupts are employed. The
         processor need not spend time waiting for an I/O operation to be performed,
         thus increasing efficiency.
     4.  The I/O module is given direct control of memory via DMA. It can now move
         a block of data to or from memory without involving the processor, except at
         the beginning and end of the transfer.
     5.  The I/O module is enhanced to become a separate processor, with a
         specialized instruction set tailored for I/O. The central processing unit
         (CPU) directs the I/O processor to execute an I/O program in main
         memory. The I/O processor fetches and executes these instructions without
         processor intervention. This allows the processor to specify a sequence of
         I/O activities and to be interrupted only when the entire sequence has been
         performed.
     6.  The I/O module has a local memory of its own and is, in fact, a computer
         in its own right. With this architecture, a large set of I/O devices can be
         controlled, with minimal processor involvement. A common use for such an
         architecture has been to control communications with interactive terminals.
         The I/O processor takes care of most of the tasks involved in controlling the
         terminals.
         As one proceeds along this evolutionary path, more and more of the I/O
     function is performed without processor involvement. The central processor is
     increasingly relieved of I/O-related tasks, improving performance. With the last
     two steps (5 and 6), a major change occurs with the introduction of the concept of
     an I/O module capable of executing a program.
         A note about terminology: For all of the modules described in steps 4
     through 6, the term direct memory access is appropriate, because all of these
     types involve direct control of main memory by the I/O module. Also, the I/O
     module in step 5 is often referred to as an I/O channel, and that in step 6 as an
     I/O processor; however, each term is, on occasion, applied to both situations. In
     the latter part of this section, we will use the term I/O channel to refer to both
     types of I/O modules.
     Direct Memory Access
     Figure 11.2 indicates, in general terms, the DMA logic. The DMA unit is capable of
     mimicking the processor and, indeed, of taking over control of the system bus just
     like a processor. It needs to do this to transfer data to and from memory over the
     system bus.

                                                 Data
                                                 count
                Data lines                       Data
                                                 register
                                                 Address
   Address lines                                 register
   Request to DMA
   Acknowledge from DMA                          Control
                Interrupt                        logic
                Read
                Write
   Figure 11.2  Typical DMA Block Diagram
   The DMA technique works as follows. When the processor wishes to read or
write a block of data, it issues a command to the DMA module by sending to the
DMA module the following information:
  Whether a read or write is requested, using the read or write control line
   between the processor and the DMA module
  The address of the I/O device involved, communicated on the data lines
  The starting location in memory to read from or write to, communicated on
   the data lines and stored by the DMA module in its address register
  The number of words to be read or written, again communicated via the data
   lines and stored in the data count register
   The processor then continues with other work. It has delegated this I/O operation
to the DMA module. The DMA module transfers the entire block of data, one word
at a time, directly to or from memory, without going through the processor. When the
transfer is complete, the DMA module sends an interrupt signal to the processor. Thus,
the processor is involved only at the beginning and end of the transfer (Figure C.4c).
   The DMA mechanism can be configured in a variety of ways. Some possi-
bilities are shown in Figure 11.3. In the first example, all modules share the same
system bus. The DMA module, acting as a surrogate processor, uses programmed
I/O to exchange data between memory and an I/O module through the DMA mod-
ule. This configuration, while it may be inexpensive, is clearly inefficient: As with
processor-controlled programmed I/O, each transfer of a word consumes two bus
cycles (transfer request followed by transfer).
   The number of required bus cycles can be cut substantially by integrating the
DMA and I/O functions. As Figure 11.3b indicates, this means that there is a path
between the DMA module and one or more I/O modules that does not include the

      Processor          DMA  I/O                                    I/O       Memory
                              (a) Single-bus, detached DMA
      Processor          DMA            DMA                                    Memory
                         I/O
                              I/O                                    I/O
                              (b) Single-bus, integrated DMA-I/O
                                                   System bus
      Processor               DMA                                              Memory
                                                            I/O bus
                   I/O             I/O                                    I/O
                                   (c) I/O bus
      Figure 11.3  Alternative DMA Configurations
      system bus. The DMA logic may actually be a part of an I/O module, or it may be a
      separate module that controls one or more I/O modules. This concept can be taken
      one step further by connecting I/O modules to the DMA module using an I/O bus
      (Figure 11.3c). This reduces the number of I/O interfaces in the DMA module
      to one and provides for an easily expandable configuration. In all of these cases
      (Figure 11.3b and 11.3c), the system bus that the DMA module shares with the
      processor and main memory is used by the DMA module only to exchange data
      with memory and to exchange control signals with the processor. The exchange of
      data between the DMA and I/O modules takes place off the system bus.
11.3  OPERATING SYSTEM DESIGN ISSUES
      Design Objectives
      Two objectives are paramount in designing the I/O facility: efficiency and gener-
      ality. Efficiency is important because I/O operations often form a bottleneck in a
      computing system. Looking again at Figure 11.1, we see that most I/O devices are
