Operating System Design Issues

      Design Objectives
      Two objectives are paramount in designing the I/O facility: efficiency and gener-
      ality. Efficiency is important because I/O operations often form a bottleneck in a
      computing system. Looking again at Figure 11.1, we see that most I/O devices are

extremely slow compared with main memory and the processor. One way to tackle
this problem is multiprogramming, which, as we have seen, allows some processes
to be waiting on I/O operations while another process is executing. However, even
with the vast size of main memory in today's machines, it will still often be the case
that I/O is not keeping up with the activities of the processor. Swapping is used to
bring in additional ready processes to keep the processor busy, but this in itself is an
I/O operation. Thus, a major effort in I/O design has been schemes for improving
the efficiency of the I/O. The area that has received the most attention, because of
its importance, is disk I/O, and much of this chapter will be devoted to a study of
disk I/O efficiency.
The other major objective is generality. In the interests of simplicity and
freedom from error, it is desirable to handle all devices in a uniform manner. This
applies both to the way in which processes view I/O devices and to the way in
which the OS manages I/O devices and operations. Because of the diversity of
device characteristics, it is difficult in practice to achieve true generality. What can
be done is to use a hierarchical, modular approach to the design of the I/O func-
tion. This approach hides most of the details of device I/O in lower-level routines
so that user processes and upper levels of the OS see devices in terms of general
functions, such as read, write, open, close, lock, and unlock. We turn now to a
discussion of this approach.
Logical Structure of the I/O Function
In Chapter 2, in the discussion of system structure, we emphasized the hierar-
chical nature of modern operating systems. The hierarchical philosophy is that
the functions of the OS should be separated according to their complexity, their
characteristic time scale, and their level of abstraction. Following this approach
leads to an organization of the OS into a series of layers. Each layer performs
a related subset of the functions required of the OS. It relies on the next lower
layer to perform more primitive functions and to conceal the details of those
functions. It provides services to the next higher layer. Ideally, the layers should
be defined so that changes in one layer do not require changes in other layers.
Thus, we have decomposed one problem into a number of more manageable
subproblems.
In general, lower layers deal with a far shorter time scale. Some parts of the
OS must interact directly with the computer hardware, where events can have a
time scale as brief as a few billionths of a second. At the other end of the spectrum,
parts of the OS communicate with the user, who issues commands at a much more
leisurely pace, perhaps one every few seconds. The use of a set of layers conforms
nicely to this environment.
Applying this philosophy specifically to the I/O facility leads to the type
of organization suggested by Figure 11.4. The details of the organization will
depend on the type of device and the application. The three most important
logical structures are presented in the figure. Of course, a particular operat-
ing system may not conform exactly to these structures. However, the general
principles are valid, and most operating systems approach I/O in approximately
this way.

                  User                   User                     User
                  processes              processes                processes
                                                                  Directory
                                                                  management
                  Logical                Communication            File system
                  I/O                    architecture
                                                                  Physical
                                                                  organization
                  Device                 Device                   Device
                  I/O                    I/O                      I/O
                  Scheduling             Scheduling               Scheduling
                  & control              & control                & control
                  Hardware               Hardware                 Hardware
        (a) Local peripheral device      (b) Communications port  (c) File system
        Figure 11.4     A Model of I/O Organization
        Let us consider the simplest case first, that of a local peripheral device that
     communicates in a simple fashion, such as a stream of bytes or records (Figure 11.4a).
     The following layers are involved:
       Logical I/O: The logical I/O module deals with the device as a logical resource
        and is not concerned with the details of actually controlling the device. The
        logical I/O module is concerned with managing general I/O functions on behalf
        of user processes, allowing them to deal with the device in terms of a device
        identifier and simple commands such as open, close, read, and write.
       Device I/O: The requested operations and data (buffered characters, records,
        etc.) are converted into appropriate sequences of I/O instructions, channel
        commands, and controller orders. Buffering techniques may be used to improve
        utilization.
       Scheduling and control: The actual queueing and scheduling of I/O operations
        occurs at this layer, as well as the control of the operations. Thus, interrupts

         are handled at this layer and I/O status is collected and reported. This is the
         layer of software that actually interacts with the I/O module and hence the
         device hardware.
         For a communications device, the I/O structure (Figure 11.4b) looks much the
      same as that just described. The principal difference is that the logical I/O module is
      replaced by a communications architecture, which may itself consist of a number of
      layers. An example is TCP/IP, which is discussed in Chapter 17.
         Figure 11.4c shows a representative structure for managing I/O on a secondary
      storage device that supports a file system. The three layers not previously discussed
      are as follows:
        Directory management: At this layer, symbolic file names are converted to
         identifiers that either reference the file directly or indirectly through a file
         descriptor or index table. This layer is also concerned with user operations
         that affect the directory of files, such as add, delete, and reorganize.
        File system: This layer deals with the logical structure of files and with the
         operations that can be specified by users, such as open, close, read, and write.
         Access rights are also managed at this layer.
        Physical organization: Just as virtual memory addresses must be converted
         into physical main memory addresses, taking into account the segmentation
         and paging structure, logical references to files and records must be con-
         verted to physical secondary storage addresses, taking into account the physi-
         cal track and sector structure of the secondary storage device. Allocation of
         secondary storage space and main storage buffers is generally treated at this
         layer as well.
         Because of the importance of the file system, we will spend some time, in this
      chapter and the next, looking at its various components. The discussion in this chap-
      ter focuses on the lower three layers, while the upper two layers are examined in
      Chapter 12.
