Disk Scheduling
      service. Even with multiple buffers, all of the buffers will eventually fill up and the
      process will have to wait after processing each chunk of data. However, in a multi-
      programming environment, when there is a variety of I/O activity and a variety of
      process activity to service, buffering is one tool that can increase the efficiency of
      the OS and the performance of individual processes.
11.5  DISK SCHEDULING
      Over the last 40 years, the increase in the speed of processors and main memory has
      far outstripped that for disk access, with processor and main memory speeds increas-
      ing by about two orders of magnitude compared to one order of magnitude for disk.
      The result is that disks are currently at least four orders of magnitude slower than
      main memory. This gap is expected to continue into the foreseeable future. Thus,
      the performance of disk storage subsystem is of vital concern, and much research
      has gone into schemes for improving that performance. In this section, we highlight
      some of the key issues and look at the most important approaches. Because the
      performance of the disk system is tied closely to file system design issues, the discus-
      sion continues in Chapter 12.
      Disk Performance Parameters
      The actual details of disk I/O operation depend on the computer system, the oper-
      ating system, and the nature of the I/O channel and disk controller hardware. A
      general timing diagram of disk I/O transfer is shown in Figure 11.6.
      When the disk drive is operating, the disk is rotating at constant speed. To
      read or write, the head must be positioned at the desired track and at the beginning
      of the desired sector on that track.1 Track selection involves moving the head in a
      movable-head system or electronically selecting one head on a fixed-head system.
      On a movable-head system, the time it takes to position the head at the track is
      known as seek time. In either case, once the track is selected, the disk controller
      waits until the appropriate sector rotates to line up with the head. The time it takes
      for the beginning of the sector to reach the head is known as rotational delay, or
      rotational latency. The sum of the seek time, if any, and the rotational delay equals
      the access time, which is the time it takes to get into position to read or write. Once
      the head is in position, the read or write operation is then performed as the sector
      moves under the head; this is the data transfer portion of the operation; the time
      required for the transfer is the transfer time.
      Wait for         Wait for      Seek                                    Rotational  Data
      device           channel                                               delay       transfer
                                                       Device busy
      Figure 11.6  Timing of a Disk I/O Transfer
      1See Appendix J for a discussion of disk organization and formatting.

     In addition to the access time and transfer time, there are several queueing
     delays normally associated with a disk I/O operation. When a process issues an
     I/O request, it must first wait in a queue for the device to be available. At that
     time, the device is assigned to the process. If the device shares a single I/O channel
     or a set of I/O channels with other disk drives, then there may be an additional
     wait for the channel to be available. At that point, the seek is performed to begin
     disk access.
     In some high-end systems for servers, a technique known as rotational
     positional sensing (RPS) is used. This works as follows: When the seek command
     has been issued, the channel is released to handle other I/O operations. When
     the seek is completed, the device determines when the data will rotate under
     the head. As that sector approaches the head, the device tries to reestablish the
     communication path back to the host. If either the control unit or the channel is
     busy with another I/O, then the reconnection attempt fails and the device must
     rotate one whole revolution before it can attempt to reconnect, which is called
     an RPS miss. This is an extra delay element that must be added to the time line
     of Figure 11.6.
     SEEK TIME       Seek time is the time required to move the disk arm to the required
     track. It turns out that this is a difficult quantity to pin down. The seek time consists
     of two key components: the initial startup time and the time taken to traverse the
     tracks that have to be crossed once the access arm is up to speed. Unfortunately, the
     traversal time is not a linear function of the number of tracks but includes a settling
     time (time after positioning the head over the target track until track identification
     is confirmed).
     Much improvement comes from smaller and lighter disk components. Some
     years ago, a typical disk was 14 inches (36 cm) in diameter, whereas the most common
     size today is 3.5 inches (8.9 cm), reducing the distance that the arm has to travel. A
     typical average seek time on contemporary hard disks is under 10 ms.
     ROTATIONAL       DELAY  Rotational delay is the time required for the addressed
     area of the disk to rotate into a position where it is accessible by the read/write
     head. Disks rotate at speeds ranging from 3,600 rpm (for handheld devices such as
     digital cameras) up to, as of this writing, 15,000 rpm; at this latter speed, there is one
     revolution per 4 ms. Thus, on the average, the rotational delay will be 2 ms.
     TRANSFER TIME    The transfer time to or from the  disk  depends      on  the  rotation
     speed of the disk in the following fashion:
                                    T=            b
                                                  rN
     where
     T  transfer time
     b  number of bytes to be transferred
     N  number of bytes on a track
     r  rotation speed, in revolutions per second

     Thus, the total average access time can be expressed as
                                  Ta = Ts +        1   +  b
                                                   2r     rN
where Ts is the average seek time.
A TIMING COMPARISON         With the foregoing parameters defined, let us look at
two different I/O operations that illustrate the danger of relying on average values.
Consider a disk with an advertised average seek time of 4 ms, rotation speed of
7,500 rpm, and 512-byte sectors with 500 sectors per track. Suppose that we wish to
read a file consisting of 2,500 sectors for a total of 1.28 Mbytes. We would like to
estimate the total time for the transfer.
     First, let us assume that the file is stored as compactly as possible on
the  disk.  That  is,  the  file  occupies    all  of  the   sectors  on  5  adjacent  tracks
(5 tracks * 500 sectors/track = 2,500 sectors). This is known as sequential organiza-
tion. The time to read the first track is as follows:
                            Average seek                      4 ms
                            Rotational delay                  4 ms
                            Read 500 sectors                  8 ms
                                                             16 ms
     Suppose that the remaining tracks can now be read with essentially no seek
time. That is, the I/O operation can keep up with the flow from the disk. Then, at
most, we need to deal with rotational delay for each succeeding track. Thus, each
successive track is read in 4 + 8 = 12 rmms. To read the entire file,
            Total time = 16 + (4 * 12) = 64 ms = 0.064 seconds
     Now let us calculate the time required to read the same data using random
access rather than sequential access; that is, accesses to the sectors are distributed
randomly over the disk. For each sector, we have:
                            Average seek                  4   ms
                            Rotational delay              4   ms
                            Read 1 sector                 0.016 ms
                                                          8.016 ms
            Total time = 2,500 * 8.016 = 20,040 ms = 20.04 seconds
     It is clear that the order in which sectors are read from the disk has a tremen-
dous effect on I/O performance. In the case of file access in which multiple sectors
are read or written, we have some control over the way in which sectors of data are
deployed, and we shall have something to say on this subject in the next chapter.
However, even in the case of a file access, in a multiprogramming environment,
there will be I/O requests competing for the same disk. Thus, it is worthwhile to
examine ways in which the performance of disk I/O can be improved over that
achieved with purely random access to the disk.

     Disk Scheduling Policies
     In the example just described, the reason for the difference in performance can be
     traced to seek time. If sector access requests involve selection of tracks at random,
     then the performance of the disk I/O system will be as poor as possible. To improve
     matters, we need to reduce the average time spent on seeks.
     Consider the typical situation in a multiprogramming environment, in which
     the OS maintains a queue of requests for each I/O device. So, for a single disk, there
     will be a number of I/O requests (reads and writes) from various processes in the
     queue. If we selected items from the queue in random order, then we can expect that
     the tracks to be visited will occur randomly, giving poor performance. This random
     scheduling is useful as a benchmark against which to evaluate other techniques.
     Figure 11.7 compares the performance of various scheduling algorithms for an
     example sequence of I/O requests. The vertical axis corresponds to the tracks on the
     disk. The horizontal axis corresponds to time or, equivalently, the number of tracks
     traversed. For this figure, we assume that the disk head is initially located at track 100.
     In this example, we assume a disk with 200 tracks and that the disk request queue has
     random requests in it. The requested tracks, in the order received by the disk sched-
     uler, are 55, 58, 39, 18, 90, 160, 150, 38, 184. Table 11.2a tabulates the results.
     FIRST IN FIRST OUT  The simplest form of scheduling is first-in-first-out (FIFO)
     scheduling, which processes items from the queue in sequential order. This strategy
     has the advantage of being fair, because every request is honored and the requests are
     honored in the order received. Figure 11.7a illustrates the disk arm movement with
     FIFO. This graph is generated directly from the data in Table 11.2a. As can be seen,
     the disk accesses are in the same order as the requests were originally received.
     With FIFO, if there are only a few processes that require access and if many
     of the requests are to clustered file sectors, then we can hope for good performance.
     However, this technique will often approximate random scheduling in performance,
     if there are many processes competing for the disk. Thus, it may be profitable to
     consider a more sophisticated scheduling policy. A number of these are listed in
     Table 11.3 and will now be considered.
     PRIORITY  With a system based on priority (PRI), the control of the scheduling is
     outside the control of disk management software. Such an approach is not intended
     to optimize disk utilization but to meet other objectives within the OS. Often short
     batch jobs and interactive jobs are given higher priority than longer jobs that require
     longer computation. This allows a lot of short jobs to be flushed through the system
     quickly and may provide good interactive response time. However, longer jobs
     may have to wait excessively long times. Furthermore, such a policy could lead to
     countermeasures on the part of users, who split their jobs into smaller pieces to beat
     the system. This type of policy tends to be poor for database systems.
     SHORTEST  SERVICE   TIME  FIRST  The shortest-service-time-first (SSTF) policy
     is to select the disk I/O request that requires the least movement of the disk arm
     from its current position. Thus, we always choose to incur the minimum seek time.
     Of course, always choosing the minimum seek time does not guarantee that the

              0
              25
Track number  50
              75
              100
              125
              150
              175
              199
                                               Time
                                               (a) FIFO
              0
              25
Track number  50
              75
              100
              125
              150
              175
              199
                                               Time
                                               (b) SSTF
              0
              25
Track number  50
              75
              100
              125
              150
              175
              199
                                               Time
                                               (c) SCAN
              0
              25
Track number  50
              75
              100
              125
              150
              175
              199
                                               Time
                                               (d) C-SCAN
Figure             11.7  Comparison  of  Disk  Scheduling Algorithms (see  Table  11.2)

Table 11.2  Comparison     of Disk Scheduling Algorithms
                                                                    (c) SCAN (starting             (d) C-SCAN (starting
                                                                    at track 100, in the           at track 100, in the
     (a) FIFO (starting    (b) SSTF (starting                       direction of increasing        direction of increasing
      at track 100)        at track 100)                            track number)                        track number)
             Number                             Number                            Number           Next       Number
Next track   of tracks     Next track           of tracks   Next track            of tracks        track      of tracks
accessed     traversed     accessed             traversed           accessed      traversed        accessed   traversed
     55              45    90                   10                  150             50             150        50
     58              3     58                   32                  160             10             160        10
     39              19    55                        3              184             24             184        24
     18              21    39                   16                  90              94             18         166
     90              72    38                        1              58              32             38         20
160                  70    18                   20                  55              3              39         1
150                  10    150                  132                 39              16             55         16
     38           112      160                  10                  38              1              58         3
184               146      184                  24                  18              20             90         32
Average              55.3  Average              27.5                Average         27.8           Average    35.8
seek                       seek                                     seek                           seek
length                     length                                   length                         length
         average seek time over a number of arm movements will be minimum. However,
         this should provide better performance than FIFO. Because the arm can move in
         two directions, a random tie-breaking algorithm may be used to resolve cases of
         equal distances.
Table 11.3  Disk     Scheduling Algorithms
Name                               Description                                                Remarks
                                               Selection according  to requestor
RSS                        Random scheduling                                  For analysis and simulation
FIFO                       First-in-first-out                                 Fairest of them all
PRI                        Priority by process                                Control outside of disk queue management
LIFO                       Last in first out                                  Maximize locality and resource utilization
                                 Selection according to             requested item
SSTF                       Shortest-service-time first                        High utilization, small queues
SCAN                       Back and forth over disk                           Better service distribution
C-SCAN                     One way with fast return                           Lower service variability
N-step-SCAN                SCAN of N records at a time                        Service guarantee
FSCAN                      N-step-SCAN with N = queue size                    Load sensitive
                           at beginning of SCAN cycle

Figure 11.7b and Table 11.2b show the performance of SSTF on the same
example as was used for FIFO. The first track accessed is 90, because this is the
closest requested track to the starting position. The next track accessed is 58 because
this is the closest of the remaining requested tracks to the current position of 90.
Subsequent tracks are selected accordingly.
SCAN    With the exception of FIFO, all of the policies described so far can leave
some request unfulfilled until the entire queue is emptied. That is, there may always
be new requests arriving that will be chosen before an existing request. A simple
alternative that prevents this sort of starvation is the SCAN algorithm, also known
as the elevator algorithm because it operates much the way an elevator does.
With SCAN, the arm is required to move in one direction only, satisfying all
outstanding requests en route, until it reaches the last track in that direction or until
there are no more requests in that direction. This latter refinement is sometimes
referred to as the LOOK policy. The service direction is then reversed and the scan
proceeds in the opposite direction, again picking up all requests in order.
Figure 11.7c and Table 11.2c illustrate the SCAN policy. Assuming that the
initial direction is of increasing track number, then the first track selected is 150,
since this is the closest track to the starting track of 100 in the increasing direction.
As can be seen, the SCAN policy behaves almost identically with the SSTF
policy. Indeed, if we had assumed that the arm was moving in the direction of lower
track numbers at the beginning of the example, then the scheduling pattern would
have been identical for SSTF and SCAN. However, this is a static example in which
no new items are added to the queue. Even when the queue is dynamically chang-
ing, SCAN will be similar to SSTF unless the request pattern is unusual.
Note that the SCAN policy is biased against the area most recently traversed.
Thus it does not exploit locality as well as SSTF.
It is not difficult to see that the SCAN policy favors jobs whose requests are
for tracks nearest to both innermost and outermost tracks and favors the latest-
arriving jobs. The first problem can be avoided via the C-SCAN policy, while the
second problem is addressed by the N-step-SCAN policy.
C-SCAN  The C-SCAN (circular SCAN) policy restricts scanning to one direction
only. Thus, when the last track has been visited in one direction, the arm is returned
to the opposite end of the disk and the scan begins again. This reduces the maximum
delay experienced by new requests. With SCAN, if the expected time for a scan
from inner track to outer track is t, then the expected service interval for sectors at
the periphery is 2t. With C-SCAN, the interval is on the order of t + s max , where
smax is the maximum seek time.
Figure 11.7d and Table 11.2d illustrate C-SCAN behavior. In this case the first
three requested tracks encountered are 150, 160, and 184. Then the scan begins
starting at the lowest track number, and the next requested track encountered is 18.
N-STEP-SCAN AND FSCAN           With SSTF, SCAN, and C-SCAN, it is possible that
the arm may not move for a considerable period of time. For example, if one or a
few processes have high access rates to one track, they can monopolize the entire
device by repeated requests to that track. High-density multisurface disks are more

     likely to be affected by this characteristic than lower-density disks and/or disks with
     only one or two surfaces. To avoid this "arm stickiness," the disk request queue
     can be segmented, with one segment at a time being processed completely. Two
     examples of this approach are N-step-SCAN and FSCAN.
         The N-step-SCAN policy segments the disk request queue into subqueues of
     length N. Subqueues are processed one at a time, using SCAN. While a queue is
     being processed, new requests must be added to some other queue. If fewer than N
     requests are available at the end of a scan, then all of them are processed with the
     next scan. With large values of N, the performance of N-step-SCAN approaches
     that of SCAN; with a value of N = 1, the FIFO policy is adopted.
         FSCAN is a policy that uses two subqueues. When a scan begins, all of the
     requests are in one of the queues, with the other empty. During the scan, all new
     requests are put into the other queue. Thus, service of new requests is deferred until
     all of the old requests have been processed.
11.6 RAID
     As discussed earlier, the rate in improvement in secondary storage performance
     has been considerably less than the rate for processors and main memory. This
     mismatch has made the disk storage system perhaps the main focus of concern in
     improving overall computer system performance.
         As in other areas of computer performance, disk storage designers recognize
     that if one component can only be pushed so far, additional gains in performance
     are to be had by using multiple parallel components. In the case of disk storage,
     this leads to the development of arrays of disks that operate independently and
     in parallel. With multiple disks, separate I/O requests can be handled in parallel,
     as long as the data required reside on separate disks. Further, a single I/O request
     can be executed in parallel if the block of data to be accessed is distributed across
     multiple disks.
         With the use of multiple disks, there is a wide variety of ways in which the data
     can be organized and in which redundancy can be added to improve reliability. This
     could make it difficult to develop database schemes that are usable on a number of
     platforms and operating systems. Fortunately, industry has agreed on a standard-
     ized scheme for multiple-disk database design, known as RAID (redundant array of
     independent disks). The RAID scheme consists of seven levels,2 zero through six.
     These levels do not imply a hierarchical relationship but designate different design
     architectures that share three common characteristics:
     1.  RAID is a set of physical disk drives viewed by the OS as a single logical drive.
     2.  Data are distributed across the physical drives of an array in a scheme known
         as striping, described subsequently.
     3.  Redundant disk capacity is used to store parity information, which guarantees
         data recoverability in case of a disk failure.
     2Additional levels have been defined by some researchers and some companies, but the seven levels
     described in this section are the ones universally agreed on.
