UNIX SVR4 I/O

                               In UNIX, each individual I/O device is associated with a special file. These are man-
                               aged by the file system and are read and written in the same manner as user data
                               files. This provides a clean, uniform interface to users and processes. To read from
                               or write to a device, read and write requests are made for the special file associated
                               with the device.
                                      Figure 11.12 illustrates the logical structure of the I/O facility. The file subsys-
                               tem manages files on secondary storage devices. In addition, it serves as the process
                               interface to devices, because these are treated as files.
                                      There are two types of I/O in UNIX: buffered and unbuffered. Buffered I/O
                               passes through system buffers, whereas unbuffered I/O typically involves the DMA

                                 File subsystem
                                            Buffer cache
                                 Character  Block
                                 Device drivers
                 Figure 11.12               UNIX I/O Structure
facility, with the transfer taking place directly between the I/O module and the
process I/O area. For buffered I/O, two types of buffers are used: system buffer
caches and character queues.
Buffer Cache
The buffer cache in UNIX is essentially a disk cache. I/O operations with disk are
handled through the buffer cache. The data transfer between the buffer cache and
the user process space always occurs using DMA. Because both the buffer cache
and the process I/O area are in main memory, the DMA facility is used in this case
to perform a memory-to-memory copy. This does not use up any processor cycles,
but it does consume bus cycles.
   To manage the buffer cache, three lists are maintained:
·  Free list: List of all slots in the cache (a slot is referred to as a buffer in UNIX;
   each slot holds one disk sector) that are available for allocation
·  Device list: List of all buffers currently associated with each disk
·  Driver I/O queue: List of buffers that are actually undergoing or waiting for
   I/O on a particular device
   All buffers should be on the free list or on the driver I/O queue list. A buffer,
once associated with a device, remains associated with the device even if it is on the
free list, until is actually reused and becomes associated with another device. These
lists are maintained as pointers associated with each buffer rather than physically
separate lists.
   When a reference is made to a physical block number on a particular device, the
OS first checks to see if the block is in the buffer cache. To minimize the search time,
the device list is organized as a hash table, using a technique similar to the overflow
with chaining technique discussed in Appendix F (Figure F.1b). Figure 11.13 depicts
the general organization of the buffer cache. There is a hash table of fixed length
that contains pointers into the buffer cache. Each reference to a (device#, block#)
maps into a particular entry in the hash table. The pointer in that entry points to
the first buffer in the chain. A hash pointer associated with each buffer points to
the next buffer in the chain for that hash table entry. Thus, for all (device#, block#)

                               Hash table                      Buffer cache  Free list pointers  Hash pointers
              Device#, Block#
                               Free list
                               pointer
              Figure 11.13     UNIX Buffer Cache Organization
     references that map into the same hash table entry, if the corresponding block is in
     the buffer cache, then that buffer will be in the chain for that hash table entry. Thus,
     the length of the search of the buffer cache is reduced by a factor on the order of N,
     where N is the length of the hash table.
     For block replacement, a least-recently-used algorithm is used: After a buffer has
     been allocated to a disk block, it cannot be used for another block until all other buff-
     ers have been used more recently. The free list preserves this least-recently-used order.
     Character Queue
     Block-oriented devices, such as disk and USB keys, can be effectively served by the
     buffer cache. A different form of buffering is appropriate for character-oriented
     devices, such as terminals and printers. A character queue is either written by the
     I/O device and read by the process or written by the process and read by the device.
     In both cases, the producer/consumer model introduced in Chapter 5 is used. Thus,
     character queues may only be read once; as each character is read, it is effectively
     destroyed. This is in contrast to the buffer cache, which may be read multiple times
     and hence follows the readers/writers model (also discussed in Chapter 5).
     Unbuffered I/O
     Unbuffered I/O, which is simply DMA between device and process space,
     is always the fastest method for a process to perform I/O. A process that is

      Table 11.5  Device I/O in UNIX
                              Unbuffered I/O  Buffer Cache                   Character Queue
      Disk Drive                      X       X
      Tape Drive                      X       X
      Terminals                                                              X
      Communication Lines                                                    X
      Printers                        X                                      X
      performing unbuffered I/O is locked in main memory and cannot be swapped
      out. This reduces the opportunities for swapping by tying up part of main mem-
      ory, thus reducing the overall system performance. Also, the I/O device is tied up
      with the process for the duration of the transfer, making it unavailable for other
      processes.
      UNIX Devices
      Among the categories of devices recognized by UNIX are the following:
      ·  Disk drives
      ·  Tape drives
      ·  Terminals
      ·  Communication lines
      ·  Printers
         Table 11.5 shows the types of I/O suited to each type of device. Disk drives
      are heavily used in UNIX, are block oriented, and have the potential for reason-
      able high throughput. Thus, I/O for these devices tends to be unbuffered or via
      buffer cache. Tape drives are functionally similar to disk drives and use similar I/O
      schemes.
         Because terminals involve relatively slow exchange of characters, terminal I/O
      typically makes use of the character queue. Similarly, communication lines require
      serial processing of bytes of data for input or output and are best handled by char-
      acter queues. Finally, the type of I/O used for a printer will generally depend on its
      speed. Slow printers will normally use the character queue, while a fast printer might
      employ unbuffered I/O. A buffer cache could be used for a fast printer. However,
      because data going to a printer are never reused, the overhead of the buffer cache is
      unnecessary.
