File Management
FILE MANAGEMENT
     12.1   Overview
            Files and File Systems
            File Structure
            File Management Systems
     12.2   File Organization and Access
            The Pile
            The Sequential File
            The Indexed Sequential File
            The Indexed File
            The Direct or Hashed File
     12.3   B-Trees
     12.4   File Directories
            Contents
            Structure
            Naming
     12.5   File Sharing
            Access Rights
            Simultaneous Access
     12.6   Record Blocking
     12.7   Secondary Storage Management
            File Allocation
            Free Space Management
            Volumes
            Reliability
     12.8   File System Security
     12.9   UNIX File Management
     12.10  Linux Virtual File System
     12.11  Windows File System
     12.12  Summary
     12.13  Recommended Reading
     12.14  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
520

   If there is one singular characteristic that makes squirrels unique
   among    small   mammals   it  is  their  natural  instinct  to    hoard  food.
   Squirrels have developed sophisticated capabilities in their hoarding.
   Different types of food are stored in different ways to maintain quality.
   Mushrooms, for instance, are usually dried before storing. This is done
   by impaling them on branches or leaving them in the forks of trees for
   later retrieval. Pine cones, on the other hand, are often harvested while
   green and cached in damp conditions that keep seeds from ripening.
   Gray squirrels usually strip outer husks from walnuts before storing.
                                  --SQUIRRELS: A WILDLIFE HANDBOOK, Kim Long
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
  Describe the basic concepts of files and file systems.
  Understand the principal techniques for file organization and access.
  Define B-trees.
  Explain file directories.
  Understand the requirements for file sharing.
  Understand the concept of record blocking.
  Describe the principal design issues for secondary storage management.
  Understand the design issues for file system security.
  Explain the OS file systems used in Linux, UNIX, and Windows 7.
In most applications, the file is the central element. With the exception of real-time
applications and some other specialized applications, the input to the application is
by means of a file; and in virtually all applications, output is saved in a file for long-
term storage and for later access by the user and by other programs.
   Files have a life outside of any individual application that uses them for input
and/or output. Users wish to be able to access files, save them, and maintain the
integrity of their contents. To aid in these objectives, virtually all operating systems
provide file management systems. Typically, a file management system consists of
system utility programs that run as privileged applications. However, at the very
least, a file management system needs special services from the operating system;
at the most, the entire file management system is considered part of the operating
system. Thus, it is appropriate to consider the basic elements of file management in
this book.
   We begin with an overview, followed by a look at various file organization
schemes. Although file organization is generally beyond the scope of the operating
system, it is essential to have a general understanding of the common alternatives to
appreciate some of the design trade-offs involved in file management. The remain-
der of this chapter looks at other topics in file management.

12.1 OVERVIEW
     Files and File Systems
     From the user's point of view, one of the most important parts of an operating
     system is the file system. The file system provides the resource abstractions typi-
     cally associated with secondary storage. The file system permits users to create data
     collections, called files, with desirable properties, such as:
       Long-term existence: Files are stored on disk or other secondary storage and
        do not disappear when a user logs off.
       Sharable between processes: Files have names and can have associated access
        permissions that permit controlled sharing.
       Structure: Depending on the file system, a file can have an internal structure
        that is convenient for particular applications. In addition, files can be organ-
        ized into hierarchical or more complex structure to reflect the relationships
        among files.
        Any file system provides not only a means to store data organized as files, but
     a collection of functions that can be performed on files. Typical operations include
     the following:
       Create: A new file is defined and positioned within the structure of files.
       Delete: A file is removed from the file structure and destroyed.
       Open: An existing file is declared to be "opened" by a process, allowing the
        process to perform functions on the file.
       Close: The file is closed with respect to a process, so that the process no longer
        may perform functions on the file, until the process opens the file again.
       Read: A process reads all or a portion of the data in a file.
       Write: A process updates a file, either by adding new data that expands the
        size of the file or by changing the values of existing data items in the file.
        Typically, a file system maintains a set of attributes associated with the file.
     These include owner, creation time, time last modified, access privileges, and so on.
     File Structure
     Four terms are in common use when discussing files:
       Field
       Record
       File
       Database
        A field is the basic element of data. An individual field contains a single value,
     such as an employee's last name, a date, or the value of a sensor reading. It is char-
     acterized by its length and data type (e.g., ASCII string, decimal). Depending on the
