Overview

     Files and File Systems
     From the user's point of view, one of the most important parts of an operating
     system is the file system. The file system provides the resource abstractions typi-
     cally associated with secondary storage. The file system permits users to create data
     collections, called files, with desirable properties, such as:
       Long-term existence: Files are stored on disk or other secondary storage and
        do not disappear when a user logs off.
       Sharable between processes: Files have names and can have associated access
        permissions that permit controlled sharing.
       Structure: Depending on the file system, a file can have an internal structure
        that is convenient for particular applications. In addition, files can be organ-
        ized into hierarchical or more complex structure to reflect the relationships
        among files.
        Any file system provides not only a means to store data organized as files, but
     a collection of functions that can be performed on files. Typical operations include
     the following:
       Create: A new file is defined and positioned within the structure of files.
       Delete: A file is removed from the file structure and destroyed.
       Open: An existing file is declared to be "opened" by a process, allowing the
        process to perform functions on the file.
       Close: The file is closed with respect to a process, so that the process no longer
        may perform functions on the file, until the process opens the file again.
       Read: A process reads all or a portion of the data in a file.
       Write: A process updates a file, either by adding new data that expands the
        size of the file or by changing the values of existing data items in the file.
        Typically, a file system maintains a set of attributes associated with the file.
     These include owner, creation time, time last modified, access privileges, and so on.
     File Structure
     Four terms are in common use when discussing files:
       Field
       Record
       File
       Database
        A field is the basic element of data. An individual field contains a single value,
     such as an employee's last name, a date, or the value of a sensor reading. It is char-
     acterized by its length and data type (e.g., ASCII string, decimal). Depending on the

file design, fields may be fixed length or variable length. In the latter case, the field
often consists of two or three subfields: the actual value to be stored, the name of
the field, and, in some cases, the length of the field. In other cases of variable-length
fields, the length of the field is indicated by the use of special demarcation symbols
between fields.
   A record is a collection of related fields that can be treated as a unit by some
application program. For example, an employee record would contain such fields
as name, social security number, job classification, date of hire, and so on. Again,
depending on design, records may be of fixed length or variable length. A record
will be of variable length if some of its fields are of variable length or if the number
of fields may vary. In the latter case, each field is usually accompanied by a field
name. In either case, the entire record usually includes a length field.
   A file is a collection of similar records. The file is treated as a single entity by
users and applications and may be referenced by name. Files have file names and
may be created and deleted. Access control restrictions usually apply at the file
level. That is, in a shared system, users and programs are granted or denied access
to entire files. In some more sophisticated systems, such controls are enforced at the
record or even the field level.
   Some file systems are structured only in terms of fields, not records. In that
case, a file is a collection of fields.
   A database is a collection of related data. The essential aspects of a database
are that the relationships that exist among elements of data are explicit and that the
database is designed for use by a number of different applications. A database may
contain all of the information related to an organization or project, such as a business
or a scientific study. The database itself consists of one or more types of files. Usually,
there is a separate database management system that is independent of the operat-
ing system, although that system may make use of some file management programs.
   Users and applications wish to make use of files. Typical operations that must
be supported include the following:
  Retrieve_All: Retrieve all the records of a file. This will be required for
   an application that must process all of the information in the file at one time.
   For example, an application that produces a summary of the information in
   the file would need to retrieve all records. This operation is often equated
   with the term sequential processing, because all of the records are accessed in
   sequence.
  Retrieve_One: This requires the retrieval of just a single record. Interactive,
   transaction-oriented applications need this operation.
  Retrieve_Next: This requires the retrieval of the record that is "next" in
   some logical sequence to the most recently retrieved record. Some interactive
   applications, such as filling in forms, may require such an operation. A pro-
   gram that is performing a search may also use this operation.
  Retrieve_Previous: Similar to Retrieve_Next, but in this case the
   record that is "previous" to the currently accessed record is retrieved.
  Insert_One: Insert a new record into the file. It may be necessary that the
   new record fit into a particular position to preserve a sequencing of the file.

        Delete_One: Delete an existing record. Certain linkages or other data struc-
         tures may need to be updated to preserve the sequencing of the file.
        Update_One: Retrieve a record, update one or more of its fields, and rewrite
         the updated record back into the file. Again, it may be necessary to pre-
         serve sequencing with this operation. If the length of the record has changed,
         the update operation is generally more difficult than if the length is preserved.
        Retrieve_Few: Retrieve a number of records. For example, an application
         or user may wish to retrieve all records that satisfy a certain set of criteria.
         The nature of the operations that are most commonly performed on a file will
     influence the way the file is organized, as discussed in Section 12.2.
         It should be noted that not all file systems exhibit the sort of structure dis-
     cussed in this subsection. On UNIX and UNIX-like systems, the basic file structure
     is just a stream of bytes. For example, a C program is stored as a file but does not
     have physical fields, records, and so on.
     File Management Systems
     A file management system is that set of system software that provides services to
     users and applications in the use of files. Typically, the only way that a user or appli-
     cation may access files is through the file management system. This relieves the user
     or programmer of the necessity of developing special-purpose software for each
     application and provides the system with a consistent, well-defined means of con-
     trolling its most important asset. [GROS86] suggests the following objectives for a
     file management system:
        To meet the data management needs and requirements of the user, which include
         storage of data and the ability to perform the aforementioned operations
        To guarantee, to the extent possible, that the data in the file are valid
        To optimize performance, both from the system point of view in terms of
         overall throughput and from the user's point of view in terms of response time
        To provide I/O support for a variety of storage device types
        To minimize or eliminate the potential for lost or destroyed data
        To provide a standardized set of I/O interface routines to user processes
        To provide I/O support for multiple users, in the case of multiple-user systems
         With respect to the first point, meeting user requirements, the extent of such
     requirements depends on the variety of applications and the environment in which
     the computer system will be used. For an interactive, general-purpose system, the
     following constitute a minimal set of requirements:
     1.  Each user should be able to create, delete, read, write, and modify files.
     2.  Each user may have controlled access to other users' files.
     3.  Each user may control what types of accesses are allowed to the user's files.
     4.  Each user should be able to restructure the user's files in a form appropriate to
         the problem.

5.    Each user should be able to move data between files.
6.    Each user should be able to back up and recover the user's files in case of
      damage.
7.    Each user should be able to access his or her files by name rather than by
      numeric identifier.
These objectives and requirements should be kept in mind throughout our discus-
sion of file management systems.
FILE  SYSTEM   ARCHITECTURE              One way of getting a feel for the scope of file
management is to look at a depiction of a typical software organization, as suggested
in Figure 12.1. Of course, different systems will be organized differently, but this
organization is reasonably representative. At the lowest level, device drivers
communicate directly with peripheral devices or their controllers or channels. A
device driver is responsible for starting I/O operations on a device and processing
the completion of an I/O request. For file operations, the typical devices controlled
are disk and tape drives. Device drivers are usually considered to be part of the
operating system.
      The next level is referred to as the basic file system, or the physical I/O level.
This is the primary interface with the environment outside of the computer system.
It deals with blocks of data that are exchanged with disk or tape systems. Thus, it is
concerned with the placement of those blocks on the secondary storage device and
on the buffering of those blocks in main memory. It does not understand the con-
tent of the data or the structure of the files involved. The basic file system is often
considered part of the operating system.
      The basic I/O supervisor is responsible for all file I/O initiation and termi-
nation. At this level, control structures are maintained that deal with device I/O,
scheduling, and file status. The basic I/O supervisor selects the device on which file
I/O is to be performed, based on the particular file selected. It is also concerned
with scheduling disk and tape accesses to optimize performance. I/O buffers are
                                         User program
               Pile        Sequential     Indexed              Indexed  Hashed
                                         sequential
                                         Logical I/O
                                         Basic I/O supervisor
                                         Basic file system
                     Disk device driver                        Tape device driver
      Figure 12.1          File System Software Architecture

     assigned and secondary memory is allocated at this level. The basic I/O supervisor is
     part of the operating system.
                Logical I/O enables users and applications to access records. Thus, whereas
     the basic file system deals with blocks of data, the logical I/O module deals with file
     records. Logical I/O provides a general-purpose record I/O capability and maintains
     basic data about files.
                The level of the file system closest to the user is often termed the access
     method. It provides a standard interface between applications and the file systems
     and devices that hold the data. Different access methods reflect different file struc-
     tures and different ways of accessing and processing the data. Some of the most
     common access methods are shown in Figure 12.1, and these are briefly described
     in Section 12.2.
     FILE MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS                        Another way of viewing the functions of a file
     system is shown in Figure 12.2. Let us follow this diagram from left to right. Users
     and application programs interact with the file system by means of commands for
     creating and deleting files and for performing operations on files. Before performing
     any operation, the file system must identify and locate the selected file. This requires
     the use of some sort of directory that serves to describe the location of all files, plus
     their attributes. In addition, most shared systems enforce user access control: Only
     authorized users are allowed to access particular files in particular ways. The basic
     operations that a user or application may perform on a file are performed at the
     record level. The user or application views the file as having some structure that
     organizes the records, such as a sequential structure (e.g., personnel records are
     stored alphabetically by last name). Thus, to translate user commands into specific
                                                               Physical blocks         Physical blocks
                                                      Records  in main memory           in secondary
                             File                                        buffers        storage (disk)
                Directory    structure  Access
                management              method                                    Disk
                                                               Blocking           scheduling
User & program
commands        Operation,              File                                      I/O                 Free storage
                file name               manipulation                                                  management
                                        functions
                                                                                  File
                                                                                  allocation
                User access
                control
                File management concerns
                                                               Operating system concerns
Figure 12.2     Elements of File Management

      file manipulation commands, the access method appropriate to this file structure
      must be employed.
         Whereas users and applications are concerned with records or fields, I/O is
      done on a block basis. Thus, the records or fields of a file must be organized as a
      sequence of blocks for output and unblocked after input. To support block I/O of
      files, several functions are needed. The secondary storage must be managed. This
      involves allocating files to free blocks on secondary storage and managing free stor-
      age so as to know what blocks are available for new files and growth in existing files.
      In addition, individual block I/O requests must be scheduled; this issue was dealt with
      in Chapter 11. Both disk scheduling and file allocation are concerned with optimizing
      performance. As might be expected, these functions therefore need to be considered
      together. Furthermore, the optimization will depend on the structure of the files and
      the access patterns. Accordingly, developing an optimum file management system
      from the point of view of performance is an exceedingly complicated task.
         Figure 12.2 suggests a division between what might be considered the con-
      cerns of the file management system as a separate system utility and the concerns
      of the operating system, with the point of intersection being record processing. This
      division is arbitrary; various approaches are taken in various systems.
         In the remainder of this chapter, we look at some of the design issues sug-
      gested in Figure 12.2. We begin with a discussion of file organizations and access
      methods. Although this topic is beyond the scope of what is usually considered the
      concerns of the operating system, it is impossible to assess the other file-related
      design issues without an appreciation of file organization and access. Next, we look
      at the concept of file directories. These are often managed by the operating system
      on behalf of the file management system. The remaining topics deal with the physi-
      cal I/O aspects of file management and are properly treated as aspects of OS design.
      One such issue is the way in which logical records are organized into physical blocks.
      Finally, there are the related issues of file allocation on secondary storage and the
      management of free secondary storage.
