 since access is checked when the file is opened protection is ensured this strategy is used in the unix system. the right to access must still be checked on each access and the file table entry has a capability only for the allowed operations. if a file is opened for reading then a capability for read access is placed in the file table entry. if an attempt is made to write onto the file the system identifies this protection violation by comparing the requested operation with the capability in the file table entrv. . access in section . . we described how access controls can be used on files within a file system. each file and directory are assigned an owner a group or possibly a list of users and for each of those entities access control information is assigned. a similar function can be added to other aspects of a computer system. a good example of this is found in solaris . solaris advances the protection available in the sun microsystems operating system by explicitly adding the principle of least privilege via role based access control rbac . this facility revolves around privileges. a privilege is the right to execute a system call or to use an option within that system call such as opening a file with write access . privileges can be assigned to processes limiting them to exactly the access they need to perform their work. privileges and programs can also be assigned to roles. users are assigned roles or can take roles based on passwords to the roles. in this way a user can take a role that enables a privilege allowing the user to run a program to accomplish a specific task as depicted in figure . . this implementation of privileges decreases the security risk associated with superusers and setuid programs. executes with role privileges figure . rote based access control in solaris . chapter protection notice that this facility is similar to the access matrix described in section . . this relationship will be further explored in the exercises at the end of the chapter