File Organization and Access

      In this section, we use the term file organization to refer to the logical structuring
      of the records as determined by the way in which they are accessed. The physical
      organization of the file on secondary storage depends on the blocking strategy and
      the file allocation strategy, issues dealt with later in this chapter.
         In choosing a file organization, several criteria are important:
      ·  Short access time
      ·  Ease of update
      ·  Economy of storage
      ·  Simple maintenance
      ·  Reliability
         The relative priority of these criteria will depend on the applications that will
      use the file. For example, if a file is only to be processed in batch mode, with all of

     the records accessed every time, then rapid access for retrieval of a single record is
     of minimal concern. A file stored on CD-ROM will never be updated, and so ease
     of update is not an issue.
     These criteria may conflict. For example, for economy of storage, there should be
     minimum redundancy in the data. On the other hand, redundancy is a primary means
     of increasing the speed of access to data. An example of this is the use of indexes.
     The number of alternative file organizations that have been implemented or
     just proposed is unmanageably large, even for a book devoted to file systems. In this
     brief survey, we will outline five fundamental organizations. Most structures used in
     actual systems either fall into one of these categories or can be implemented with a
     combination of these organizations. The five organizations, the first four of which
     are depicted in Figure 12.3, are as follows:
     Variable-length records                       Fixed-length records
     Variable set of fields                        Fixed set of fields in fixed order
     Chronological order                           Sequential order based on key field
                   (a) Pile file                               (b) Sequential file
                                                   Exhaustive  Exhaustive    Partial
                                                   index       index         index
            n
     Index                       Main file
     levels Index
        2
     1
                                 Overflow
                                  file
                                                               Primary file
               (c) Indexed sequential file                     (variable-length records)
                                                               (d) Indexed file
     Figure 12.3   Common File Organizations

            · The pile
            · The sequential file
            · The indexed sequential file
            · The indexed file
            · The direct, or hashed, file
         Table 12.1 summarizes relative performance aspects of these five organizations.1
         The Pile
         The least-complicated form of file organization may be termed the pile. Data are
         collected in the order in which they arrive. Each record consists of one burst of
         data. The purpose of the pile is simply to accumulate the mass of data and save it.
         Records may have different fields, or similar fields in different orders. Thus, each
         field should be self-describing, including a field name as well as a value. The length
         of each field must be implicitly indicated by delimiters, explicitly included as a sub-
         field, or known as default for that field type.
             Because there is no structure to the pile file, record access is by exhaustive
         search. That is, if we wish to find a record that contains a particular field with a
         particular value, it is necessary to examine each record in the pile until the desired
Table 12.1  Grades of Performance for        Five Basic File Organizations [WIED87]
                   Space                        Update                  Retrieval
                   Attributes                Record Size
File                                                            Single
Method       Variable          Fixed         Equal     Greater  record  Subset          Exhaustive
Pile         A                      B        A            E     E                    D   B
Sequential   F                      A        D            F     F                    D   A
Indexed      F                      B        B            D     B                    D   B
sequential
Indexed      B                      C        C            C     A                    B   D
Hashed       F                      B        B            F     B                    F   E
A  Excellent, well suited to this purpose     O(r)
B  Good                                       O(o  r)
C  Adequate                                   O(r log n)
D  Requires some extra effort                 O(n)
E  Possible with extreme effort               O(r  n)
F  Not reasonable for this purpose            O(n 1)
where
      r  size of the result
      o  number of records that overflow
      n  number of records in file
         1The table employs the "big-O" notation, used for characterizing the time complexity of algorithms.
         Appendix I explains this notation.

     record is found or the entire file has been searched. If we wish to find all records
     that contain a particular field or contain that field with a particular value, then the
     entire file must be searched.
     Pile files are encountered when data are collected and stored prior to process-
     ing or when data are not easy to organize. This type of file uses space well when the
     stored data vary in size and structure, is perfectly adequate for exhaustive searches,
     and is easy to update. However, beyond these limited uses, this type of file is unsuit-
     able for most applications.
     The Sequential File
     The most common form of file structure is the sequential file. In this type of file,
     a fixed format is used for records. All records are of the same length, consisting of
     the same number of fixed-length fields in a particular order. Because the length and
     position of each field are known, only the values of fields need to be stored; the field
     name and length for each field are attributes of the file structure.
     One particular field, usually the first field in each record, is referred to as the
     key field. The key field uniquely identifies the record; thus key values for different
     records are always different. Further, the records are stored in key sequence: alpha-
     betical order for a text key, and numerical order for a numerical key.
     Sequential files are typically used in batch applications and are generally
     optimum for such applications if they involve the processing of all the records (e.g.,
     a billing or payroll application). The sequential file organization is the only one that
     is easily stored on tape as well as disk.
     For interactive applications that involve queries and/or updates of individual
     records, the sequential file provides poor performance. Access requires the sequen-
     tial search of the file for a key match. If the entire file, or a large portion of the
     file, can be brought into main memory at one time, more efficient search techniques
     are possible. Nevertheless, considerable processing and delay are encountered to
     access a record in a large sequential file. Additions to the file also present problems.
     Typically, a sequential file is stored in simple sequential ordering of the records within
     blocks. That is, the physical organization of the file on tape or disk directly matches
     the logical organization of the file. In this case, the usual procedure is to place new
     records in a separate pile file, called a log file or transaction file. Periodically, a batch
     update is performed that merges the log file with the master file to produce a new file
     in correct key sequence.
     An alternative is to organize the sequential file physically as a linked list. One
     or more records are stored in each physical block. Each block on disk contains a
     pointer to the next block. The insertion of new records involves pointer manipula-
     tion but does not require that the new records occupy a particular physical block
     position. Thus, some added convenience is obtained at the cost of additional
     processing and overhead.
     The Indexed Sequential File
     A popular approach to overcoming the disadvantages of the sequential file is the
     indexed sequential file. The indexed sequential file maintains the key characteristic
     of the sequential file: Records are organized in sequence based on a key field. Two

features are added: an index to the file to support random access, and an overflow
file. The index provides a lookup capability to reach quickly the vicinity of a desired
record. The overflow file is similar to the log file used with a sequential file but is
integrated so that a record in the overflow file is located by following a pointer from
its predecessor record.
In the simplest indexed sequential structure, a single level of indexing is
used. The index in this case is a simple sequential file. Each record in the index file
consists of two fields: a key field, which is the same as the key field in the main file,
and a pointer into the main file. To find a specific field, the index is searched to find
the highest key value that is equal to or precedes the desired key value. The search
continues in the main file at the location indicated by the pointer.
To see the effectiveness of this approach, consider a sequential file with
1 million records. To search for a particular key value will require on average one-
half million record accesses. Now suppose that an index containing 1,000 entries
is constructed, with the keys in the index more or less evenly distributed over
the main file. Now it will take on average 500 accesses to the index file followed
by 500 accesses to the main file to find the record. The average search length is
reduced from 500,000 to 1,000.
Additions to the file are handled in the following manner: Each record in
the main file contains an additional field not visible to the application, which is a
pointer to the overflow file. When a new record is to be inserted into the file, it is
added to the overflow file. The record in the main file that immediately precedes
the new record in logical sequence is updated to contain a pointer to the new record
in the overflow file. If the immediately preceding record is itself in the overflow file,
then the pointer in that record is updated. As with the sequential file, the indexed
sequential file is occasionally merged with the overflow file in batch mode.
The indexed sequential file greatly reduces the time required to access a single
record, without sacrificing the sequential nature of the file. To process the entire file
sequentially, the records of the main file are processed in sequence until a pointer
to the overflow file is found, then accessing continues in the overflow file until a null
pointer is encountered, at which time accessing of the main file is resumed where it
left off.
To provide even greater efficiency in access, multiple levels of indexing can be
used. Thus the lowest level of index file is treated as a sequential file and a higher-
level index file is created for that file. Consider again a file with 1 million records.
A lower-level index with 10,000 entries is constructed. A higher-level index into
the lower-level index of 100 entries can then be constructed. The search begins at
the higher-level index (average length = 50 accesses) to find an entry point into the
lower-level index. This index is then searched (average length = 50) to find an entry
point into the main file, which is then searched (average length = 50). Thus the aver-
age length of search has been reduced from 500,000 to 1,000 to 150.
The Indexed File
The indexed sequential file retains one limitation of the sequential file: Effective
processing is limited to that which is based on a single field of the file. For example,
when it is necessary to search for a record on the basis of some other attribute than

      the key field, both forms of sequential file are inadequate. In some applications, the
      flexibility of efficiently searching by various attributes is desirable.
      To achieve this flexibility, a structure is needed that employs multiple indexes,
      one for each type of field that may be the subject of a search. In the general indexed
      file, the concept of sequentiality and a single key are abandoned. Records are
      accessed only through their indexes. The result is that there is now no restriction
      on the placement of records as long as a pointer in at least one index refers to that
      record. Furthermore, variable-length records can be employed.
      Two types of indexes are used. An exhaustive index contains one entry for
      every record in the main file. The index itself is organized as a sequential file for
      ease of searching. A partial index contains entries to records where the field of
      interest exists. With variable-length records, some records will not contain all fields.
      When a new record is added to the main file, all of the index files must be updated.
      Indexed files are used mostly in applications where timeliness of information
      is critical and where data are rarely processed exhaustively. Examples are airline
      reservation systems and inventory control systems.
      The Direct or Hashed File
      The direct, or hashed, file exploits the capability found on disks to access directly any
      block of a known address. As with sequential and indexed sequential files, a key field
      is required in each record. However, there is no concept of sequential ordering here.
      The direct file makes use of hashing on the key value. This function is explained
      in Appendix F. Figure F.1b shows the type of hashing organization with an overflow
      file that is typically used in a hash file.
      Direct files are often used where very rapid access is required, where fixed-
      length records are used, and where records are always accessed one at a time.
      Examples are directories, pricing tables, schedules, and name lists.
