 memory allows maximum speed and convenience of communication since it can be done at memory speeds when it takes place within a computer. problems exist however in the areas of protection and synchronization between the processes sharing memory. . system programs another aspect of a modern system is the collection of system programs. recall figure . which depicted the logical computer hierarchy. at the lowest level is hardware. next is the operating system then the system programs and finally the application programs. system programs provide a convenient environment for program development and execution. some of them are simply user interfaces to system calls others are considerably more complex. they can be divided into these categories file management. these programs create delete copy rename print dump list and generally manipulate files and directories. status information. some programs simply ask the system for the date time amount of available memory or disk space number of users or similar status information. others are more complex providing detailed performance logging and debugging information. typically these programs format and print the output to the terminal or other output devices or files or display it in a window of the gui. some systems also support a registry which is used to store and retrieve configuration information. file modification. several text editors may be available to create and modify the content of files stored on disk or other storage devices. there may also be special commands to search contents of files or perform transformations of the text. programming language support. compilers assemblers debuggers and interpreters for common programming languages such as c c java visual basic and perl are often provided to the user with the operating system. program loading and execution. once a program is assembled or compiled it must be loaded into memory to be executed. the system may provide absolute loaders relocatable loaders linkage editors and overlay loaders. debugging systems for either higher level languages or machine language are needed as well. communications. these programs provide the mechanism for creating virtual connections among processes users and computer systems. they allow users to send messages to one another's screens to browse web pages to send electronic mail messages to log in remotely or to transfer files from one machine to another. in addition to systems programs most operating systems are supplied with programs that are useful in solving common problems or performing common operations. such programs include web browsers word processors and text formatters spreadsheets database systems compilers plotting and chapter