File Directories

      Contents
      Associated with any file management system and collection of files is a file directory.
      The directory contains information about the files, including attributes, location,
      and ownership. Much of this information, especially that concerned with storage,

Table 12.2  Information Elements of a File Directory
                                            Basic Information
File Name                  Name as chosen by creator (user or program). Must be unique within a specific
                           directory
File Type                  For example: text, binary, load module, etc.
File Organization          For systems that support different organizations
                                            Address Information
Volume                     Indicates device on which file is stored
Starting Address           Starting physical address on secondary storage (e.g., cylinder, track, and block
                           number on disk)
Size Used                  Current size of the file in bytes, words, or blocks
Size Allocated             The maximum size of the file
                                      Access Control Information
Owner                      User who is assigned control of this file. The owner may be able to grant/deny
                           access to other users and to change these privileges.
Access Information         A simple version of this element would include the user's name and password for
                           each authorized user.
Permitted Actions          Controls reading, writing, executing, and transmitting over a network
                                            Usage Information
Date Created               When file was first placed in directory
Identity of Creator        Usually but not necessarily the current owner
Date Last Read Access      Date of the last time a record was read
Identity of Last Reader    User who did the reading
Date Last Modified         Date of the last update, insertion, or deletion
Identity of Last Modifier  User who did the modifying
Date of Last Backup        Date of the last time the file was backed up on another storage medium
Current Usage              Information about current activity on the file, such as process or processes that
                           have the file open, whether it is locked by a process, and whether the file has been
                           updated in main memory but not yet on disk
        is managed by the operating system. The directory is itself a file, accessible by vari-
        ous file management routines. Although some of the information in directories is
        available to users and applications, this is generally provided indirectly by system
        routines.
                Table 12.2 suggests the information typically stored in the directory for each
        file in the system. From the user's point of view, the directory provides a mapping
        between file names, known to users and applications, and the files themselves. Thus,
        each file entry includes the name of the file. Virtually all systems deal with different
        types of files and different file organizations, and this information is also provided.
        An important category of information about each file concerns its storage, including
        its location and size. In shared systems, it is also important to provide information
        that is used to control access to the file. Typically, one user is the owner of the file
        and may grant certain access privileges to other users. Finally, usage information is
        needed to manage the current use of the file and to record the history of its usage.

Structure
The way in which the information of Table 12.2 is stored differs widely among
various systems. Some of the information may be stored in a header record asso-
ciated with the file; this reduces the amount of storage required for the directory,
making it easier to keep all or much of the directory in main memory to improve
speed.
   The simplest form of structure for a directory is that of a list of entries, one for
each file. This structure could be represented by a simple sequential file, with the
name of the file serving as the key. In some earlier single-user systems, this tech-
nique has been used. However, it is inadequate when multiple users share a system
and even for single users with many files.
   To understand the requirements for a file structure, it is helpful to consider
the types of operations that may be performed on the directory:
  Search: When a user or application references a file, the directory must be
   searched to find the entry corresponding to that file.
  Create file: When a new file is created, an entry must be added to the directory.
  Delete file: When a file is deleted, an entry must be removed from the directory.
  List directory: All or a portion of the directory may be requested. Generally,
   this request is made by a user and results in a listing of all files owned by that
   user, plus some of the attributes of each file (e.g., type, access control informa-
   tion, usage information).
  Update directory: Because some file attributes are stored in the directory, a
   change in one of these attributes requires a change in the corresponding direc-
   tory entry.
   The simple list is not suited to supporting these operations. Consider the needs
of a single user. The user may have many types of files, including word-processing
text files, graphic files, spreadsheets, and so on. The user may like to have these
organized by project, by type, or in some other convenient way. If the directory is a
simple sequential list, it provides no help in organizing the files and forces the user
to be careful not to use the same name for two different types of files. The prob-
lem is much worse in a shared system. Unique naming becomes a serious problem.
Furthermore, it is difficult to conceal portions of the overall directory from users
when there is no inherent structure in the directory.
   A start in solving these problems would be to go to a two-level scheme. In
this case, there is one directory for each user, and a master directory. The master
directory has an entry for each user directory, providing address and access con-
trol information. Each user directory is a simple list of the files of that user. This
arrangement means that names must be unique only within the collection of files
of a single user and that the file system can easily enforce access restriction on
directories. However, it still provides users with no help in structuring collections
of files.
   A more powerful and flexible approach, and one that is almost universally
adopted, is the hierarchical, or tree-structure, approach (Figure 12.6). As before,
there is a master directory, which has under it a number of user directories. Each of

                                       Master directory
             Subdirectory              Subdirectory      Subdirectory
             Subdirectory              Subdirectory      File
             File                      File              File
             Figure 12.6   Tree-Structured Directory
     these user directories, in turn, may have subdirectories and files as entries. This is
     true at any level: That is, at any level, a directory may consist of entries for subdirec-
     tories and/or entries for files.
     It remains to say how each directory and subdirectory is organized. The simplest
     approach, of course, is to store each directory as a sequential file. When directories
     may contain a very large number of entries, such an organization may lead to unnec-
     essarily long search times. In that case, a hashed structure is to be preferred.
     Naming
     Users need to be able to refer to a file by a symbolic name. Clearly, each file in the
     system must have a unique name in order that file references be unambiguous. On
     the other hand, it is an unacceptable burden on users to require that they provide
     unique names, especially in a shared system.
     The use of a tree-structured directory minimizes the difficulty in assigning
     unique names. Any file in the system can be located by following a path from the
     root or master directory down various branches until the file is reached. The series
     of directory names, culminating in the file name itself, constitutes a pathname for
     the file. As an example, the file in the lower left-hand corner of Figure 12.7 has the
     pathname User_B/Word/Unit_A/ABC. The slash is used to delimit names in the
     sequence. The name of the master directory is implicit, because all paths start at
     that directory. Note that it is perfectly acceptable to have several files with the same
     file name, as long as they have unique pathnames, which is equivalent to saying
     that the same file name may be used in different directories. In our example, there
     is another file in the system with the file name ABC, but that has the pathname
     /User_B/Draw/ABC.

                  Master directory
                                   System
                                   User_A
                                   User_B
                                   User_C
Directory                                            Directory
"User_C"          Directory "User_B"                 "User_A"
                                   Draw
                                   Word
Directory "Word"                           Directory "Draw"
       Unit_A                                   ABC
                  Directory "Unit_A"
                                   ABC                          File
                                                                "ABC"
File                                            Pathname: /User_B/Draw/ABC
"ABC"
             Pathname: /User_B/Word/Unit_A/ABC
Figure 12.7  Example of Tree-Structured Directory
Although the pathname facilitates the selection of file names, it would be awk-
ward for a user to have to spell out the entire pathname every time a reference is
made to a file. Typically, an interactive user or a process has associated with it a
current directory, often referred to as the working directory. Files are then refer-
enced relative to the working directory. For example, if the working directory for
user B is "Word," then the pathname Unit_A/ABC is sufficient to identify the file
in the lower left-hand corner of Figure 12.7. When an interactive user logs on, or
when a process is created, the default for the working directory is the user home
directory. During execution, the user can navigate up or down in the tree to change
to a different working directory.

