Record Blocking
         One user is designated as owner of a given file, usually the person who initially
      created a file. The owner has all of the access rights listed previously and may grant
      rights to others. Access can be provided to different classes of users:
        Specific user: Individual users who are designated by user ID
        User groups: A set of users who are not individually defined. The system must
         have some way of keeping track of the membership of user groups.
        All: All users who have access to this system. These are public files.
      Simultaneous Access
      When access is granted to append or update a file to more than one user, the oper-
      ating system or file management system must enforce discipline. A brute-force
      approach is to allow a user to lock the entire file when it is to be updated. A finer
      grain of control is to lock individual records during update. Essentially, this is the
      readers/writers problem discussed in Chapter 5. Issues of mutual exclusion and
      deadlock must be addressed in designing the shared access capability.
12.6  RECORD BLOCKING
      As indicated in Figure 12.2, records are the logical unit of access of a structured file,3
      whereas blocks are the unit of I/O with secondary storage. For I/O to be performed,
      records must be organized as blocks.
         There are several issues to consider. First, should blocks be of fixed or vari-
      able length? On most systems, blocks are of fixed length. This simplifies I/O, buffer
      allocation in main memory, and the organization of blocks on secondary storage.
      Second, what should the relative size of a block be compared to the average record
      size? The trade-off is this: The larger the block, the more records that are passed
      in one I/O operation. If a file is being processed or searched sequentially, this is an
      advantage, because the number of I/O operations is reduced by using larger blocks,
      thus speeding up processing. On the other hand, if records are being accessed ran-
      domly and no particular locality of reference is observed, then larger blocks result in
      the unnecessary transfer of unused records. However, combining the frequency of
      sequential operations with the potential for locality of reference, we can say that the
      I/O transfer time is reduced by using larger blocks. The competing concern is that
      larger blocks require larger I/O buffers, making buffer management more difficult.
         Given the size of a block, there are three methods of blocking that can be used:
        Fixed blocking: Fixed-length records are used, and an integral number of
         records are stored in a block. There may be unused space at the end of each
         block. This is referred to as internal fragmentation.
        Variable-length spanned blocking: Variable-length records are used and are
         packed into blocks with no unused space. Thus, some records must span two
         blocks, with the continuation indicated by a pointer to the successor block.
      3As opposed to a file that is treated only as a stream of bytes, such as in the UNIX file system.

       Variable-length unspanned blocking: Variable-length records are used, but
        spanning is not employed. There is wasted space in most blocks because of the
        inability to use the remainder of a block if the next record is larger than the
        remaining unused space.
        Figure 12.8 illustrates these methods assuming that a file is stored in sequen-
     tial blocks on a disk. The figure assumes that the file is large enough to span two
     tracks.4 The effect would not be changed if some other file allocation scheme were
     used (see Section 12.6).
        Fixed blocking is the common mode for sequential files with fixed-length
     records. Variable-length spanned blocking is efficient of storage and does not limit
                R1                 R2                              R3        R4                          Track 1
                R5                 R6                              R7        R8                          Track 2
                                         Fixed blocking
            R1        R2           R3             R4           R4       R5                 R6            Track 1
        R6        R7           R8        R9                R9      R10  R11  R12           R13           Track 2
                                       Variable blocking: spanned
            R1        R2           R3                              R4        R5                          Track 1
                R6             R7                              R8       R9                 R10           Track 2
                                   Variable blocking: unspanned
            Data                                                   Waste due to record fit to blocksize
            Gaps due to hardware design                            Waste due to blocksize constraint
                                                                   from fixed record size
            Waste due to block fit to track size
     Figure 12.8    Record Blocking Methods [WIED87]
     4Recall from Appendix J that the organization of data on a disk is in a concentric set of rings, called tracks.
     Each track is the same width as the read/write head.

      the size of records. However, this technique is difficult to implement. Records that
      span two blocks require two I/O operations, and files are difficult to update, regard-
      less of the organization. Variable-length unspanned blocking results in wasted space
      and limits record size to the size of a block.
          The record-blocking technique may interact with the virtual memory hard-
      ware, if such is employed. In a virtual memory environment, it is desirable to make
      the page the basic unit of transfer. Pages are generally quite small, so that it is
      impractical to treat a page as a block for unspanned blocking. Accordingly, some
      systems combine multiple pages to create a larger block for file I/O purposes. This
      approach is used for VSAM files on IBM mainframes.
12.7  SECONDARY STORAGE MANAGEMENT
      On secondary storage, a file consists of a collection of blocks. The operating system
      or file management system is responsible for allocating blocks to files. This raises
      two management issues. First, space on secondary storage must be allocated to files,
      and second, it is necessary to keep track of the space available for allocation. We
      will see that these two tasks are related; that is, the approach taken for file alloca-
      tion may influence the approach taken for free space management. Further, we will
      see that there is an interaction between file structure and allocation policy.
          We begin this section by looking at alternatives for file allocation on a single
      disk. Then we look at the issue of free space management, and finally we discuss
      reliability.
      File Allocation
      Several issues are involved in file allocation:
      1.  When a new file is created, is the maximum space required for the file allo-
          cated at once?
      2.  Space is allocated to a file as one or more contiguous units, which we shall
          refer to as portions. That is, a portion is a contiguous set of allocated blocks.
          The size of a portion can range from a single block to the entire file. What size
          of portion should be used for file allocation?
      3.  What sort of data structure or table is used to keep track of the portions
          assigned to a file? An example of such a structure is a file allocation table
          (FAT), found on DOS and some other systems.
      Let us examine these issues in turn.
      PREALLOCATION VERSUS DYNAMIC ALLOCATION             A preallocation policy requires
      that the maximum size of a file be declared at the time of the file creation request.
      In a number of cases, such as program compilations, the production of summary
      data files, or the transfer of a file from another system over a communications
      network, this value can be reliably estimated. However, for many applications, it
      is difficult if not impossible to estimate reliably the maximum potential size of the
      file. In those cases, users and application programmers would tend to overestimate
