File System Security
      Reliability
      Consider the following scenario:
      1.  User A requests a file allocation to add to an existing file.
      2.  The request is granted and the disk and file allocation tables are updated in
          main memory but not yet on disk.
      3.  The system crashes and subsequently restarts.
      4.  User B requests a file allocation and is allocated space on disk that overlaps
          the last allocation to user A.
      5.  User A accesses the overlapped portion via a reference that is stored inside
          A's file.
          This difficulty arose because the system maintained a copy of the disk alloca-
      tion table and file allocation table in main memory for efficiency. To prevent this type
      of error, the following steps could be performed when a file allocation is requested:
      1.  Lock the disk allocation table on disk. This prevents another user from causing
          alterations to the table until this allocation is completed.
      2.  Search the disk allocation table for available space. This assumes that a copy
          of the disk allocation table is always kept in main memory. If not, it must first
          be read in.
      3.  Allocate space, update the disk allocation table, and update the disk. Updating
          the disk involves writing the disk allocation table back onto disk. For chained
          disk allocation, it also involves updating some pointers on disk.
      4.  Update the file allocation table and update the disk.
      5.  Unlock the disk allocation table.
          This technique will prevent errors. However, when small portions are allo-
      cated frequently, the impact on performance will be substantial. To reduce this
      overhead, a batch storage allocation scheme could be used. In this case, a batch of
      free portions on the disk is obtained for allocation. The corresponding portions on
      disk are marked "in use." Allocation using this batch may proceed in main memory.
      When the batch is exhausted, the disk allocation table is updated on disk and a new
      batch may be acquired. If a system crash occurs, portions on the disk marked "in
      use" must be cleaned up in some fashion before they can be reallocated. The tech-
      nique for cleanup will depend on the file system's particular characteristics.
12.8  FILE SYSTEM SECURITY
      Following successful log-on, the user has been granted access to one or a set of
      hosts and applications. This is generally not sufficient for a system that includes
      sensitive data in its database. Through the user­access control procedure, a user
      can be identified to the system. Associated with each user, there can be a profile
      that specifies permissible operations and file accesses. The operating system can
      then enforce rules based on the user profile. The database management system,

        however, must control access to specific records or even portions of records. For
        example, it may be permissible for anyone in administration to obtain a list of com-
        pany personnel, but only selected individuals may have access to salary information.
        The issue is more than just a matter of level of detail. Whereas the operating system
        may grant a user permission to access a file or use an application, following which
        there are no further security checks, the database management system must make
        a decision on each individual access attempt. That decision will depend not only on
        the user's identity but also on the specific parts of the data being accessed and even
        on the information already divulged to the user.
              A general model of access control as exercised by a file or database man-
        agement system is that of an access matrix (Figure 12.15a, based on a figure in
        [SAND94]). The basic elements of the model are as follows:
                 File 1  File 2                    File 3  File 4     Account 1   Account 2
                 Own                               Own                Inquiry
        User A   R                                 R                     credit
                 W                                 W
                         Own                                             Inquiry     Inquiry
        User B   R       R                         W               R       debit     credit
                         W
                 R                                         Own                       Inquiry
        User C   W       R                                         R                 debit
                                                                   W
                                                   (a) Access matrix
File 1        A     B                           C          User A     File 1      File 3
        Own                                     R                     Own         Own
              R     R       W                                         R           R
              W                                                       W           W
File 2        B     C                                      User B     File 1      File 2      File 3              File 4
        Own                                                                       Own
              R     R                                                 R           R           W                   R
              W                                                                   W
File 3        A     B                                      User C     File 1      File 2      File 4
        Own                                                           R                       Own
              R     W                                                 W           R           R
              W                                                                               W
File 4        B     C                                                 (c) Capability lists for files of part (a)
                 Own
              R     R
                    W
(b) Access control lists for files of part (a)
Figure 12.15     Example of Access Control Structures

      ·  Subject: An entity capable of accessing objects. Generally, the concept of sub-
         ject equates with that of process. Any user or application actually gains access
         to an object by means of a process that represents that user or application.
      ·  Object: Anything to which access is controlled. Examples include files, portions
         of files, programs, segments of memory, and software objects (e.g., Java objects).
      ·  Access right: The way in which an object is accessed by a subject. Examples
         are read, write, execute, and functions in software objects.
         One dimension of the matrix consists of identified subjects that may attempt
      data access. Typically, this list will consist of individual users or user groups, although
      access could be controlled for terminals, hosts, or applications instead of or in addi-
      tion to users. The other dimension lists the objects that may be accessed. At the great-
      est level of detail, objects may be individual data fields. More aggregate groupings,
      such as records, files, or even the entire database, may also be objects in the matrix.
      Each entry in the matrix indicates the access rights of that subject for that object.
         In practice, an access matrix is usually sparse and is implemented by decom-
      position in one of two ways. The matrix may be decomposed by columns, yielding
      access control lists (Figure 12.15b). Thus for each object, an access control list lists
      users and their permitted access rights. The access control list may contain a default,
      or public, entry. This allows users that are not explicitly listed as having special rights
      to have a default set of rights. Elements of the list may include individual users as
      well as groups of users.
         Decomposition by rows yields capability tickets (Figure 12.15c). A capabil-
      ity ticket specifies authorized objects and operations for a user. Each user has a
      number of tickets and may be authorized to loan or give them to others. Because
      tickets may be dispersed around the system, they present a greater security problem
      than access control lists. In particular, the ticket must be unforgeable. One way to
      accomplish this is to have the operating system hold all tickets on behalf of users.
      These tickets would have to be held in a region of memory inaccessible to users.
         Network considerations for data­oriented access control parallel those for
      user­oriented access control. If only certain users are permitted to access certain
      items of data, then encryption may be needed to protect those items during trans-
      mission to authorized users. Typically, data access control is decentralized, that is,
      controlled by host­based database management systems. If a network database
      server exists on a network, then data access control becomes a network function.
12.9  UNIX FILE MANAGEMENT
      In the UNIX file system, six types of files are distinguished:
      ·  Regular, or ordinary: Contains arbitrary data in zero or more data blocks.
         Regular files contain information entered in them by a user, an application
         program, or a system utility program. The file system does not impose any
         internal structure to a regular file but treats it as a stream of bytes.
      ·  Directory: Contains a list of file names plus pointers to associated inodes (index
         nodes), described later. Directories are hierarchically organized (Figure 12.6).
