UNIX File Management
      ·  Subject: An entity capable of accessing objects. Generally, the concept of sub-
         ject equates with that of process. Any user or application actually gains access
         to an object by means of a process that represents that user or application.
      ·  Object: Anything to which access is controlled. Examples include files, portions
         of files, programs, segments of memory, and software objects (e.g., Java objects).
      ·  Access right: The way in which an object is accessed by a subject. Examples
         are read, write, execute, and functions in software objects.
         One dimension of the matrix consists of identified subjects that may attempt
      data access. Typically, this list will consist of individual users or user groups, although
      access could be controlled for terminals, hosts, or applications instead of or in addi-
      tion to users. The other dimension lists the objects that may be accessed. At the great-
      est level of detail, objects may be individual data fields. More aggregate groupings,
      such as records, files, or even the entire database, may also be objects in the matrix.
      Each entry in the matrix indicates the access rights of that subject for that object.
         In practice, an access matrix is usually sparse and is implemented by decom-
      position in one of two ways. The matrix may be decomposed by columns, yielding
      access control lists (Figure 12.15b). Thus for each object, an access control list lists
      users and their permitted access rights. The access control list may contain a default,
      or public, entry. This allows users that are not explicitly listed as having special rights
      to have a default set of rights. Elements of the list may include individual users as
      well as groups of users.
         Decomposition by rows yields capability tickets (Figure 12.15c). A capabil-
      ity ticket specifies authorized objects and operations for a user. Each user has a
      number of tickets and may be authorized to loan or give them to others. Because
      tickets may be dispersed around the system, they present a greater security problem
      than access control lists. In particular, the ticket must be unforgeable. One way to
      accomplish this is to have the operating system hold all tickets on behalf of users.
      These tickets would have to be held in a region of memory inaccessible to users.
         Network considerations for data­oriented access control parallel those for
      user­oriented access control. If only certain users are permitted to access certain
      items of data, then encryption may be needed to protect those items during trans-
      mission to authorized users. Typically, data access control is decentralized, that is,
      controlled by host­based database management systems. If a network database
      server exists on a network, then data access control becomes a network function.
12.9  UNIX FILE MANAGEMENT
      In the UNIX file system, six types of files are distinguished:
      ·  Regular, or ordinary: Contains arbitrary data in zero or more data blocks.
         Regular files contain information entered in them by a user, an application
         program, or a system utility program. The file system does not impose any
         internal structure to a regular file but treats it as a stream of bytes.
      ·  Directory: Contains a list of file names plus pointers to associated inodes (index
         nodes), described later. Directories are hierarchically organized (Figure 12.6).

        Directory files are actually ordinary files with special write protection privileges
        so that only the file system can write into them, while read access is available to
        user programs.
     ·  Special: Contains no data but provides a mechanism to map physical devices
        to file names. The file names are used to access peripheral devices, such as
        terminals and printers. Each I/O device is associated with a special file, as
        discussed in Section 11.8.
     ·  Named pipes: As discussed in Section 6.7, a pipe is an interprocess communi-
        cations facility. A pipe file buffers data received in its input so that a process
        that reads from the pipe's output receives the data on a first-in-first-out basis.
     ·  Links: In essence, a link is an alternative file name for an existing file.
     ·  Symbolic links: This is a data file that contains the name of the file it is linked to.
        In this section, we are concerned with the handling of ordinary files, which
     correspond to what most systems treat as files.
     Inodes
     Modern UNIX operating systems support multiple file systems but map all of these
     into a uniform underlying system for supporting file systems and allocating disk
     space to files. All types of UNIX files are administered by the OS by means of
     inodes. An inode (index node) is a control structure that contains the key informa-
     tion needed by the operating system for a particular file. Several file names may be
     associated with a single inode, but an active inode is associated with exactly one file,
     and each file is controlled by exactly one inode.
        The attributes of the file as well as its permissions and other control infor-
     mation are stored in the inode. The exact inode structure varies from one UNIX
     implementation to another. The FreeBSD inode structure, shown in Figure 12.16,
     includes the following data elements:
     ·  The type and access mode of the file
     ·  The file's owner and group-access identifiers
     ·  The time that the file was created, when it was most recently read and written,
        and when its inode was most recently updated by the system
     ·  The size of the file in bytes
     ·  A sequence of block pointers, explained in the next subsection
     ·  The number of physical blocks used by the file, including blocks used to hold
        indirect pointers and attributes
     ·  The number of directory entries that reference the file
     ·  The kernel and user-settable flags that describe the characteristics of the file
     ·  The generation number of the file (a randomly selected number assigned to
        the inode each time that the latter is allocated to a new file; the generation
        number is used to detect references to deleted files)
     ·  The blocksize of the data blocks referenced by the inode (typically the same
        as, but sometimes larger than, the file system blocksize)

Mode                Data      Data                    Data
Owners (2)
                    Data
Timestamps (4)
                              Data                    Data                         Data
Size
Direct (0)          Data
Direct (1)                                            Data                         Data
                    Pointers
                              Pointers                Data                         Data
Direct (12)
Single indirect     Pointers
                              Pointers                                             Data
Double indirect
Triple indirect                                       Pointers
Block count                                                                        Data
Reference count
                              Pointers                Pointers
Flags (2)                                                                          Data
Generation number   Pointers
Blocksize                     Pointers                Pointers
                                                                                   Data
Extended attr size
Extended                                              Pointers
attribute                                                                          Data
blocks
Inode
Figure 12.16     Structure of FreeBSD Inode and File
· The size of the extended attribute information
· Zero or more extended attribute entries
              The blocksize value is typically the same as, but sometimes larger than, the file
system blocksize. On traditional UNIX systems, a fixed blocksize of 512 bytes was
used. FreeBSD has a minimum blocksize of 4,096 bytes (4 Kbytes); the blocksize
can be any power of 2 greater than or equal to 4,096. For typical file systems, the
blocksize is 8 Kbytes or 16 Kbytes. The default FreeBSD blocksize is 16 Kbytes.
              Extended attribute entries are variable-length entries used to store auxiliary
data that are separate from the contents of the file. The first two extended attributes
defined for FreeBSD deal with security. The first of these support access control

        lists; this is described in Chapter 15. The second defined extended attribute sup-
        ports the use of security labels, which are part of what is known as a mandatory
        access control scheme, also defined in Chapter 15.
                 On the disk, there is an inode table, or inode list, that contains the inodes of
        all the files in the file system. When a file is opened, its inode is brought into main
        memory and stored in a memory-resident inode table.
        File Allocation
        File allocation is done on a block basis. Allocation is dynamic, as needed, rather
        than using preallocation. Hence, the blocks of a file on disk are not necessarily con-
        tiguous. An indexed method is used to keep track of each file, with part of the index
        stored in the inode for the file. In all UNIX implementations, the inode includes a
        number of direct pointers and three indirect pointers (single, double, triple).
                 The FreeBSD inode includes 120 bytes of address information that is organ-
        ized as fifteen 64-bit addresses, or pointers. The first 12 addresses point to the first
        12 data blocks of the file. If the file requires more than 12 data blocks, one or more
        levels of indirection is used as follows:
            ·    The thirteenth address in the inode points to a block on disk that contains the
                 next portion of the index. This is referred to as the single indirect block. This
                 block contains the pointers to succeeding blocks in the file.
            ·    If the file contains more blocks, the fourteenth address in the inode points to
                 a double indirect block. This block contains a list of addresses of additional
                 single indirect blocks. Each of single indirect blocks, in turn, contains pointers
                 to file blocks.
            ·    If the file contains still more blocks, the fifteenth address in the inode points
                 to a triple indirect block that is a third level of indexing. This block points to
                 additional double indirect blocks.
                 All of this is illustrated in Figure 12.16. The total number of data blocks
        in a file depends on the capacity of the fixed-size blocks in the system. In
        FreeBSD, the minimum block size is 4 Kbytes, and each block can hold a total of
        512 block addresses. Thus, the maximum size of a file with this block size is over
        500 GB (Table 12.4).
                 This scheme has several advantages:
            1.   The inode is of fixed size and relatively small and hence may be kept in main
                 memory for long periods.
Table 12.4  Capacity of a FreeBSD File with 4-Kbyte Block Size
Level                             Number of Blocks              Number of Bytes
Direct                                                12                        48K
Single Indirect                                       512                       2M
Double Indirect                            512 × 512  256K                      1G
Triple Indirect                   512 × 256K  128M                              512G

2.  Smaller files may be accessed with little or no indirection, reducing processing
    and disk access time.
3.  The theoretical maximum size of a file is large enough to satisfy virtually all
    applications.
Directories
Directories are structured in a hierarchical tree. Each directory can contain files
and/or other directories. A directory that is inside another directory is referred to
as a subdirectory. As was mentioned, a directory is simply a file that contains a
list of file names plus pointers to associated inodes. Figure 12.17 shows the overall
structure. Each directory entry (dentry) contains a name for the associated file or
subdirectory plus an integer called the i-number (index number). When the file or
directory is accessed, its i-number is used as an index into the inode table.
Volume Structure
A UNIX file system resides on a single logical disk or disk partition and is laid out
with the following elements:
·   Boot block: Contains code required to boot the operating system
·   Superblock: Contains attributes and information about the file system, such as
    partition size, and inode table size
·   Inode table: The collection of inodes for each file
·   Data blocks: Storage space available for data files and subdirectories
             Inode table                                     Directory
                                                         i1  Name1
                                                         i2  Name2
                                                         i3  Name3
                                                         i4  Name4
    Figure 12.17           UNIX Directories and Inodes

     Traditional UNIX File Access Control
     Most UNIX systems depend on, or at least are based on, the file access control
     scheme introduced with the early versions of UNIX. Each UNIX user is assigned a
     unique user identification number (user ID). A user is also a member of a primary
     group, and possibly a number of other groups, each identified by a group ID. When
     a file is created, it is designated as owned by a particular user and marked with that
     user's ID. It also belongs to a specific group, which initially is either its creator's
     primary group, or the group of its parent directory if that directory has SetGID
     permission set. Associated with each file is a set of 12 protection bits. The owner ID,
     group ID, and protection bits are part of the file's inode.
     Nine of the protection bits specify read, write, and execute permission for the
     owner of the file, other members of the group to which this file belongs, and all
     other users. These form a hierarchy of owner, group, and all others, with the highest
     relevant set of permissions being used. Figure 12.18a shows an example in which the
     file owner has read and write access; all other members of the file's group have read
     access, and users outside the group have no access rights to the file. When applied to
     a directory, the read and write bits grant the right to list and to create/rename/delete
     files in the directory.5 The execute bit grants the right to search the directory for a
     component of a filename.
                                                        OGOtrwhoneureprcclclalasasssss
                                                        rw-  r--  ---
                               user:              :rw-
                               group: :r--
                               other: :---
     (a) Traditional UNIX approach (minimal access control list)
                                                        OGOtrwhoneureprcclclalasasssss
                                                        rw-  rw-  ---
                               user: :rw-
     Masked                    user:joe:rw-
     entries                   group: :r--
                               mask: :rw-
                               other: :---
                               (b) Extended access control list
     Figure 12.18                     UNIX File Access Control
     5Note that the permissions that apply to a directory are distinct from those that apply to any file or direc-
     tory it contains. The fact that a user has the right to write to the directory does not give the user the right
     to write to a file in that directory. That is governed by the permissions of the specific file. The user would,
     however, have the right to rename the file.

The remaining three bits define special additional behavior for files or direc-
tories. Two of these are the "set user ID" (SetUID) and "set group ID" (SetGID)
permissions. If these are set on an executable file, the operating system functions as
follows. When a user (with execute privileges for this file) executes the file, the sys-
tem temporarily allocates the rights of the user's ID of the file creator, or the file's
group, respectively, to those of the user executing the file. These are known as the
"effective user ID" and "effective group ID" and are used in addition to the "real
user ID" and "real group ID" of the executing user when making access control
decisions for this program. This change is only effective while the program is being
executed. This feature enables the creation and use of privileged programs that may
use files normally inaccessible to other users. It enables users to access certain files
in a controlled fashion. Alternatively, when applied to a directory, the SetGID per-
mission indicates that newly created files will inherit the group of this directory. The
SetUID permission is ignored.
The final permission bit is the "Sticky" bit. When set on a file, this originally
indicated that the system should retain the file contents in memory following execu-
tion. This is no longer used. When applied to a directory, though, it specifies that
only the owner of any file in the directory can rename, move, or delete that file. This
is useful for managing files in shared temporary directories.
One particular user ID is designated as "superuser." The superuser is exempt
from the usual file access control constraints and has systemwide access. Any
program that is owned by, and SetUID to, the "superuser" potentially grants unre-
stricted access to the system to any user executing that program. Hence, great care
is needed when writing such programs.
This access scheme is adequate when file access requirements align with users
and a modest number of groups of users. For example, suppose a user wants to give
read access for file X to users A and B and read access for file Y to users B and C.
We would need at least two user groups, and user B would need to belong to both
groups in order to access the two files. However, if there are a large number of
different groupings of users requiring a range of access rights to different files, then
a very large number of groups may be needed to provide this. This rapidly becomes
unwieldy and difficult to manage, even if possible at all.6 One way to overcome this
problem is to use access control lists, which are provided in most modern UNIX
systems.
A final point to note is that the traditional UNIX file access control scheme
implements a simple protection domain structure. A domain is associated with the
user, and switching the domain corresponds to changing the user ID temporarily.
Access Control Lists in UNIX
Many modern UNIX and UNIX-based operating systems support access control
lists, including FreeBSD, OpenBSD, Linux, and Solaris. In this section, we describe
the FreeBSD approach, but other implementations have essentially the same fea-
tures and interface. The feature is referred to as extended access control list, while
the traditional UNIX approach is referred to as minimal access control list.
6Most UNIX systems impose a limit on the maximum number of groups any user may belong to, as well
as to the total number of groups possible on the system.

           FreeBSD allows the administrator to assign a list of UNIX user IDs and
     groups to a file by using the setfacl command. Any number of users and groups
     can be associated with a file, each with three protection bits (read, write, execute),
     offering a flexible mechanism for assigning access rights. A file need not have an
     ACL but may be protected solely by the traditional UNIX file access mechanism.
     FreeBSD files include an additional protection bit that indicates whether the file
     has an extended ACL.
           FreeBSD and most UNIX implementations that support extended ACLs use
     the following strategy (e.g., Figure 12.18b):
       1.  The owner class and other class entries in the nine-bit permission field have
           the same meaning as in the minimal ACL case.
       2.  The group class entry specifies the permissions for the owner group for this
           file. These permissions represent the maximum permissions that can be
           assigned to named users or named groups, other than the owning user. In this
           latter role, the group class entry functions as a mask.
       3.  Additional named users and named groups may be associated with the file,
           each with a three-bit permission field. The permissions listed for a named
           user or named group are compared to the mask field. Any permission
           for the named user or named group that is not present in the mask field is
           disallowed.
           When a process requests access to a file system object, two steps are performed.
     Step 1 selects the ACL entry that most closely matches the requesting process. The
     ACL entries are looked at in the following order: owner, named users, (owning or
     named) groups, and others. Only a single entry determines access. Step 2 checks
     if the matching entry contains sufficient permissions. A process can be a member
     in more than one group; so more than one group entry can match. If any of these
     matching group entries contain the requested permissions, one that contains the
     requested permissions is picked (the result is the same no matter which entry is
     picked). If none of the matching group entries contains the requested permissions,
     access will be denied no matter which entry is picked.
12.10  LINUX VIRTUAL FILE SYSTEM
     Linux includes a versatile and powerful file-handling facility, designed to support a
     wide variety of file management systems and file structures. The approach taken in
     Linux is to make use of a virtual file system (VFS), which presents a single, uniform
     file system interface to user processes. The VFS defines a common file model that is
     capable of representing any conceivable file system's general feature and behavior.
     The VFS assumes that files are objects in a computer's mass storage memory that
     share basic properties regardless of the target file system or the underlying proces-
     sor hardware. Files have symbolic names that allow them to be uniquely identified
     within a specific directory within the file system. A file has an owner, protection
     against unauthorized access or modification, and a variety of other properties. A
     file may be created, read from, written to, or deleted. For any specific file system, a

              User process
                 System call
System calls interface
                            Virtual file
                            system (VFS)
                                                          Linux kernel
IBM JFS       DOS FS          NTFS        ext2 FS
Page cache
Device drivers
              I/O request
                                                          Hardware
Disk controller
Figure 12.19  Linux Virtual File System Context
mapping module is needed to transform the characteristics of the real file system to
the characteristics expected by the virtual file system.
Figure 12.19 indicates the key ingredients of the Linux file system strategy. A
user process issues a file system call (e.g., read) using the VFS file scheme. The VFS
converts this into an internal (to the kernel) file system call that is passed to a map-
ping function for a specific file system [e.g., IBM's Journaling File System (JFS)]. In
most cases, the mapping function is simply a mapping of file system functional calls
from one scheme to another. In some cases, the mapping function is more complex.
For example, some file systems use a file allocation table (FAT), which stores the
position of each file in the directory tree. In these file systems, directories are not
files. For such file systems, the mapping function must be able to construct dynami-
cally, and when needed, the files corresponding to the directories. In any case, the
original user file system call is translated into a call that is native to the target file
system. The target file system software is then invoked to perform the requested
function on a file or directory under its control and secondary storage. The results
of the operation are then communicated back to the user in a similar fashion.
Figure 12.20 indicates the role that VFS plays within the Linux kernel. When
a process initiates a file-oriented system call (e.g., read), the kernel calls a function
in the VFS. This function handles the file-system-independent manipulations and
initiates a call to a function in the target file system code. This call passes through
a mapping function that converts the call from the VFS into a call to the target file

                                                                System calls
         System calls                  VFS                      using
         using VFS                     system                   filesystem X             Disk I/O
         user interface  Linux         calls   Mapping          interface                calls
                         virtual               function                       File
                         file                          to file                system X
User                     system                system X
process
                                                                                                   Files on secondary
                                                                                                   storage maintained
                                                                                                   by file system X
Figure   12.20  Linux    Virtual File  System Concept
                system. The VFS is independent of any file system, so the implementation of a map-
                ping function must be part of the implementation of a file system on Linux. The
                target file system converts the file system request into device-oriented instructions
                that are passed to a device driver by means of page cache functions.
                         VFS is an object-oriented scheme. Because it is written in C, rather than a
                language that supports object programming (such as C++ or Java), VFS objects are
                implemented simply as C data structures. Each object contains both data and point-
                ers to file-system-implemented functions that operate on data. The four primary
                object types in VFS are as follows:
                ·        Superblock object: Represents a specific mounted file system
                ·        Inode object: Represents a specific file
                ·        Dentry object: Represents a specific directory entry
                ·        File object: Represents an open file associated with a process
                         This scheme is based on the concepts used in UNIX file systems, as described in
                Section 12.7. The key concepts of UNIX file system to remember are the following. A
                file system consists of a hierarchal organization of directories. A directory is the same
                as what is known as a folder on many non-UNIX platforms and may contain files and/
                or other directories. Because a directory may contain other directories, a tree struc-
                ture is formed. A path through the tree structure from the root consists of a sequence
                of directory entries, ending in either a directory entry (dentry) or a file name. In
                UNIX, a directory is implemented as a file that lists the files and directories contained
                within it. Thus, file operations can be performed on either files or directories.
                The Superblock Object
                The superblock object stores information describing a specific file system. Typically,
                the superblock corresponds to the file system superblock or file system control
                block, which is stored in a special sector on disk.
                         The superblock object consists of a number of data items. Examples include
                the following:
                · The device that this file system is mounted on
                · The basic block size of the file system

·  Dirty flag, to indicate that the superblock has been      changed  but not  written
   back to disk
·  File system type
·  Flags, such as a read-only flag
·  Pointer to the root of the file system directory
·  List of open files
·  Semaphore for controlling access to the file system
·  List of superblock operations
   The last item on the preceding list refers to an operations object contained
within the superblock object. The operations object defines the object methods
(functions) that the kernel can invoke against the superblock object. The methods
defined for the superblock object include the following:
·  read_inode: Read a specified inode from a mounted file system.
·  write_inode: Write given inode to disk.
·  put_inode: Release inode.
·  delete_inode: Delete inode from disk.
·  notify_change: Called when inode attributes are changed.
·  put_super: Called by the VFS on unmount to release the given superblock.
·  write_super: Called when the VFS decides that the superblock needs to be
   written to disk.
·  statfs: Obtain file system statistics.
·  remount_fs: Called by the VFS when the file system is remounted with new
   mount options.
·  clear_inode: Release inode and clear any pages containing related data.
The Inode Object
An inode is associated with each file. The inode object holds all the information
about a named file except its name and the actual data contents of the file. Items
contained in an inode object include owner, group, permissions, access times for a
file, size of data it holds, and number of links.
   The inode object also includes an inode operations object that describes the
file system's implemented functions that the VFS can invoke on an inode. The
methods defined for the inode object include the following:
·  create: Creates a new inode for a regular file associated with a dentry object
   in some directory
·  lookup: Searches a directory for an inode corresponding to a file name
·  mkdir: Creates a new inode for a directory associated with a dentry object in
   some directory

     The Dentry Object
     A dentry (directory entry) is a specific component in a path. The component may
     be either a directory name or a file name. Dentry objects facilitate access to files
     and directories and are used in a dentry cache for that purpose. The dentry object
     includes a pointer to the inode and superblock. It also includes a pointer to the
     parent dentry and pointers to any subordinate dentrys.
     The File Object
     The file object is used to represent a file opened by a process. The object is created
     in response to the open() system call and destroyed in response to the close() sys-
     tem call. The file object consists of a number of items, including the following:
       ·  Dentry object associated with the file
       ·  File system containing the file
       ·  File objects usage counter
       ·  User's user ID
       ·  User's group ID
       ·  File pointer, which is the current position  in    the  file  from    which   the  next
          operation will take place
          The file object also includes an inode operations object that describes the file
     system's implemented functions that the VFS can invoke on a file object. The methods
     defined for the file object include read, write, open, release, and lock.
12.11  WINDOWS FILE SYSTEM
     The developers of Windows NT designed a new file system, the New Technology
     File System (NTFS), which is intended to meet high-end requirements for worksta-
     tions and servers. Examples of high-end applications include the following:
       ·  Client/server applications such as file servers, compute servers, and database
          servers
       ·  Resource-intensive engineering and scientific applications
       ·  Network applications for large corporate systems
          This section provides an overview of NTFS.
     Key Features of NTFS
     NTFS is a flexible and powerful file system built, as we shall see, on an elegantly sim-
     ple file system model. The most noteworthy features of NTFS include the following:
       ·  Recoverability: High on the list of requirements for the new Windows file
          system was the ability to recover from system crashes and disk failures. In the
          event of such failures, NTFS is able to reconstruct disk volumes and return
          them to a consistent state. It does this by using a transaction-processing model

   for changes to the file system; each significant change is treated as an atomic
   action that is either entirely performed or not performed at all. Each transac-
   tion that was in process at the time of a failure is subsequently backed out or
   brought to completion. In addition, NTFS uses redundant storage for critical
   file system data, so that failure of a disk sector does not cause the loss of data
   describing the structure and status of the file system.
·  Security: NTFS uses the Windows object model to enforce security. An open
   file is implemented as a file object with a security descriptor that defines its
   security attributes. The security descriptor is persisted as an attribute of each
   file on disk.
·  Large disks and large files: NTFS supports very large disks and very large files
   more efficiently than other file systems, such as FAT.
·  Multiple data streams: The actual contents of a file are treated as a stream of
   bytes. In NTFS, it is possible to define multiple data streams for a single file.
   An example of the utility of this feature is that it allows Windows to be used
   by remote Macintosh systems to store and retrieve files. On Macintosh, each
   file has two components: the file data and a resource fork that contains infor-
   mation about the file. NTFS treats these two components as two data streams
   within a single file.
·  Journaling: NTFS keeps a log of all changes made to files on the volumes.
   Programs, such as desktop search, can read the journal to identify what files
   have changed.
·  Compression and encryption: Entire directories and individual files can be
   transparently compressed and/or encrypted.
·  Hard and symbolic links: In order to support POSIX, Windows has always sup-
   ported "hard links," which allow a single file to be accessible by multiple path
   names on the same volume. Starting with Windows Vista, "symbolic links"
   are supported which allow a file or directory to be accessible by multiple path
   names, even if the names are on different volumes. Windows also supports
   "mount points" which allow volumes to appear at junction points on other
   volumes, rather than be named by driver letters, such as "D:".
NTFS Volume and File Structure
NTFS makes use of the following disk storage concepts:
·  Sector: The smallest physical storage unit on the disk. The data size in bytes is
   a power of 2 and is almost always 512 bytes.
·  Cluster: One or more contiguous (next to each other on the disk) sectors. The
   cluster size in sectors is a power of 2.
·  Volume: A logical partition on a disk, consisting of one or more clusters and
   used by a file system to allocate space. At any time, a volume consists of file
   system information, a collection of files, and any additional unallocated space
   remaining on the volume that can be allocated to files. A volume can be all or
   a portion of a single disk or it can extend across multiple disks. If hardware or

Table 12.5  Windows       NTFS  Partition  and     Cluster Sizes
Volume Size                                        Sectors per Cluster             Cluster Size
512 Mbyte                                          1                               512 bytes
512 Mbyte­1 Gbyte                                  2                               1K
1 Gbyte­2 Gbyte                                    4                               2K
2 Gbyte­4 Gbyte                                    8                               4K
4 Gbyte­8 Gbyte                                    16                              8K
8 Gbyte­16 Gbyte                                   32                              16K
16 Gbyte­32 Gbyte                                  64                              32K
>32 Gbyte                                          128                             64K
             software RAID 5 is employed, a volume consists of stripes spanning multiple
             disks. The maximum volume size for NTFS is 264 bytes.
             The cluster is the fundamental unit of allocation in NTFS, which does not
     recognize sectors. For example, suppose each sector is 512 bytes and the system is
     configured with two sectors per cluster (one cluster  1K bytes). If a user creates
     a file of 1,600 bytes, two clusters are allocated to the file. Later, if the user updates
     the file to 3,200 bytes, another two clusters are allocated. The clusters allocated to a
     file need not be contiguous; it is permissible to fragment a file on the disk. Currently,
     the maximum file size supported by NTFS is 232 clusters, which is equivalent to a
     maximum of 248 bytes. A cluster can have at most 216 bytes.
             The use of clusters for allocation makes NTFS independent of physical sec-
     tor size. This enables NTFS to support easily nonstandard disks that do not have a
     512-byte sector size and to support efficiently very large disks and very large files
     by using a larger cluster size. The efficiency comes from the fact that the file system
     must keep track of each cluster allocated to each file; with larger clusters, there are
     fewer items to manage.
             Table 12.5 shows the default cluster sizes for NTFS. The defaults depend on
     the size of the volume. The cluster size that is used for a particular volume is estab-
     lished by NTFS when the user requests that a volume be formatted.
     NTFS VOLUME LAYOUT                    NTFS uses a remarkably simple but powerful approach
     to organizing information on a disk volume. Every element on a volume is a file,
     and every file consists of a collection of attributes. Even the data contents of a file is
     treated as an attribute. With this simple structure, a few general-purpose functions
     suffice to organize and manage a file system.
             Figure 12.21 shows the layout of an NTFS volume, which consists of four
     regions. The first few sectors on any volume are occupied by the partition boot
            Partition                              System
             boot               Master file table  files                File area
             sector
            Figure 12.21  NTFS Volume Layout

        sector (although it is called a sector, it can be up to 16 sectors long), which contains
        information about the volume layout and the file system structures as well as boot
        startup information and code. This is followed by the master file table (MFT), which
        contains information about all of the files and folders (directories) on this NTFS
        volume. In essence, the MFT is a list of all files and their attributes on this NTFS
        volume, organized as a set of rows in a table structure.
                   Following the MFT is a region containing system files. Among the files in this
        region are the following:
                ·  MFT2: A mirror of the first few rows of the MFT, used to guarantee access to
                   the volume in the case of a single-sector failure in the sectors storing the MFT.
                ·  Log file: A list of transaction steps used for NTFS recoverability.
                ·  Cluster bit map: A representation of the space on the volume, showing which
                   clusters are in use.
                ·  Attribute definition table: Defines the attribute types supported on this
                   volume and indicates whether they can be indexed and whether they can be
                   recovered during a system recovery operation.
        MASTER FILE TABLE                The heart of the Windows file system is the MFT. The MFT
        is organized as a table of 1,024-byte rows, called records. Each row describes a file
        on this volume, including the MFT itself, which is treated as a file. If the contents of
        a file are small enough, then the entire file is located in a row of the MFT. Otherwise,
        the row for that file contains partial information and the remainder of the file spills
        over into other available clusters on the volume, with pointers to those clusters in
        the MFT row of that file.
                   Each record in the MFT consists of a set of attributes that serve to define the
        file (or folder) characteristics and the file contents. Table 12.6 lists the attributes
        that may be found in a row, with the required attributes indicated by shading.
Table 12.6      Windows NTFS File and Directory Attribute Types
Attribute Type                                            Description
Standard information  Includes access attributes (read-only, read/write, etc.); time stamps, including when the
                      file was created or last modified; and how many directories point to the file (link count)
Attribute list        A list of attributes that make up the file and the file reference of the MFT file record
                      in which each attribute is located. Used when all attributes do not fit into a single
                      MFT file record
File name             A file or directory must have one or more names.
Security descriptor   Specifies who owns the file and who can access it
Data                  The contents of the file. A file has one default unnamed data attribute and may have
                      one or more named data attributes.
Index root            Used to implement folders
Index allocation      Used to implement folders
Volume information    Includes volume-related information, such as the version and name of the volume
Bitmap                Provides a map representing records in use on the MFT or folder
Note: Green-colored rows refer to required file attributes; the other attributes are optional.

     Recoverability
     NTFS makes it possible to recover the file system to a consistent state following a
     system crash or disk failure. The key elements that support recoverability are as
     follows (Figure 12.22):
     ·  I/O manager: Includes the NTFS driver, which handles the basic open, close,
        read, and write functions of NTFS. In addition, the software RAID module
        FTDISK can be configured for use.
     ·  Log file service: Maintains a log of file system metadata changes on disk. The
        log file is used to recover an NTFS-formatted volume in the case of a system
        failure (i.e., without having to run the file system check utility).
     ·  Cache manager: Responsible for caching file reads and writes to enhance
        performance. The cache manager optimizes disk I/O.
     ·  Virtual memory manager: The NTFS accesses cached files by mapping file refer-
        ences to virtual memory references and reading and writing virtual memory.
        It is important to note that the recovery procedures used by NTFS are designed
     to recover file system metadata, not file contents. Thus, the user should never lose a
     volume or the directory/file structure of an application because of a crash. However,
     user data are not guaranteed by the file system. Providing full recoverability, includ-
     ing user data, would make for a much more elaborate and resource-consuming
     recovery facility.
        The essence of the NTFS recovery capability is logging. Each operation that
     alters a file system is treated as a transaction. Each suboperation of a transaction
                                                                 I/O manager
                                            Log the transaction
                   Log file                                      NTFS driver     Read/write a
                   service      Read/write                                       mirrored or
                                  the file                       Fault-tolerant  striped volume
        Flush the  Write the                                     driver          Read/write
        log file   cache                                                         the disk
                                                                 Disk driver
                         Cache              Load data from
                         manager            disk into
                                            memory
                   Access the mapped
                   file or flush the cache
                   Virtual memory
                         manager
        Figure 12.22     Windows NTFS Components

that alters important file system data structures is recorded in a log file before being
recorded on the disk volume. Using the log, a partially completed transaction at the
time of a crash can later be redone or undone when the system recovers.
           In general terms, these are the steps taken to ensure recoverability, as
described in [RUSS11]:
       1.  NTFS first calls the log file system to record in the log file (in the cache) any
           transactions that will modify the volume structure.
       2.  NTFS modifies the volume (in the cache).
       3.  The cache manager calls the log file system to prompt it to flush the log file to
           disk.
       4.  Once the log file updates are safely on disk, the cache manager flushes the
           volume changes to disk.
12.12  SUMMARY
A file management system is a set of system software that provides services to users
and applications in the use of files, including file access, directory maintenance, and
access control. The file management system is typically viewed as a system service
that itself is served by the operating system, rather than being part of the operating
system itself. However, in any system, at least part of the file management function
is performed by the operating system.
           A file consists of a collection of records. The way in which these records may
be accessed determines its logical organization, and to some extent its physical orga-
nization on disk. If a file is primarily to be processed as a whole, then a sequential
file organization is the simplest and most appropriate. If sequential access is needed
but random access to individual file is also desired, then an indexed sequential file
may give the best performance. If access to the file is principally at random, then an
indexed file or hashed file may be the most appropriate.
           Whatever file structure is chosen, a directory service is also needed. This
allows files to be organized in a hierarchical fashion. This organization is useful to
the user in keeping track of files and is useful to the file management system in pro-
viding access control and other services to users.
           File records, even when of fixed size, generally do not conform to the size of a
physical disk block. Accordingly, some sort of blocking strategy is needed. A trade-
off among complexity, performance, and space utilization determines the blocking
strategy to be used.
           A key function of any file management scheme is the management of disk
space. Part of this function is the strategy for allocating disk blocks to a file. A vari-
ety of methods have been employed, and a variety of data structures have been used
to keep track of the allocation for each file. In addition, the space on disk that has
not been allocated must be managed. This latter function primarily consists of main-
taining a disk allocation table indicating which blocks are free.

12.13  RECOMMENDED READING
     There are a number of good books on file structures and file management. The
     following all focus on file management systems but also address related OS issues.
     Perhaps the most useful is [WIED87], which takes a quantitative approach to file
     management and deals with all of the issues raised in Figure 12.2, from disk schedul-
     ing to file structure. [VENU09] presents an object-oriented design approach toward
     file structure implementation. [LIVA90] emphasizes file structures, providing a
     good and lengthy survey with comparative performance analyses. [GROS86] pro-
     vides a balanced look at issues relating to both file I/O and file access methods. It
     also contains general descriptions of all of the control structures needed by a file
     system. These provide a useful checklist in assessing a file system design. [FOLK98]
     emphasizes the processing of files, addressing such issues as maintenance, searching
     and sorting, and sharing.
       [COME79] provides a thorough discussion of B-trees. [CORM09] and
     [KNUT98] also include good treatments.
       The Linux file system is examined in detail in [LOVE10] and [BOVE06]. A
     good overview is [RUBI97].
       [CUST94] provides a good overview of the NT file system. [NAGA97] covers
     the material in more detail.
       BOVE06  Bovet, D., and Cesati, M. Understanding the Linux Kernel. Sebastopol, CA:
       O'Reilly, 2006.
       COME79  Comer, D. "The Ubiquitous B-Tree." Computing Surveys, June 1979.
       CORM09  Cormen, T., et al. Introduction to Algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       2009.
       CUST94  Custer, H. Inside the Windows NT File System. Redmond, WA: Microsoft
       Press, 1994.
       FOLK98  Folk, M., and Zoellick, B. File Structures: An Object-Oriented Approach with
       C++. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998.
       GROS86  Grosshans, D. File Systems: Design and Implementation. Englewood Cliffs,
       NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986.
       KNUT98  Knuth, D. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3: Sorting and
       Searching. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998.
       LIVA90  Livadas, P. File Structures: Theory and Practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
       Prentice Hall, 1990.
       LOVE10  Love, R. Linux Kernel Development. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-
       Wesley, 2010.
       NAGA97  Nagar, R. Windows NT File System Internals. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly,
       1997.
       RUBI97  Rubini, A. "The Virtual File System in Linux." Linux Journal, May 1997.
       VENU09  Venugopal, K. Files Structures Using C++. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
       WIED87  Wiederhold, G. File Organization for Database Design. New York: McGraw-
       Hill, 1987.

12.14      KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
access method                        file allocation                     inode
bit table                            file allocation table               key field
block                                file directory                      pathname
chained file allocation              file management system              pile
contiguous file allocation           file name                           record
database                             hashed file                         sequential file
disk allocation table                indexed file                        working directory
field                                indexed file allocation
file                                 indexed sequential file
       Review Questions
           12.1  What is the difference between a field and a record?
           12.2  What is the difference between a file and a database?
           12.3  What is a file management system?
           12.4  What criteria are important in choosing a file organization?
           12.5  List and briefly define five file organizations.
           12.6  Why is the average search time to find a record in a file less for an indexed sequential
                 file than for a sequential file?
           12.7  What are typical operations that may be performed on a directory?
           12.8  What is the relationship between a pathname and a working directory?
           12.9  What are typical access rights that may be granted or denied to a particular user for
                 a particular file?
       12.10     List and briefly define three blocking methods.
       12.11     List and briefly define three file allocation methods.
       Problems
           12.1  Define:
                     B  block size
                     R  record size
                     P  size of block pointer
                     F  blocking factor; expected number of records within a block
                 Give a formula for F for the three blocking methods depicted in Figure 12.8.
           12.2  One scheme to avoid the problem of preallocation versus waste or lack of contiguity
                 is to allocate portions of increasing size as the file grows. For example, begin with a
                 portion size of one block, and double the portion size for each allocation. Consider a
                 file of n records with a blocking factor of F, and suppose that a simple one-level index
                 is used as a file allocation table.
                 a.  Give an upper limit on the number of entries in the file allocation table as a func-
                     tion of F and n.
                 b.  What is the maximum amount of the allocated file space that is unused at
                     any time?

     12.3   What file organization would you choose to maximize efficiency in terms of speed of
            access, use of storage space, and ease of updating (adding/deleting/modifying) when
            the data are
            a.  updated infrequently and accessed frequently in random order?
            b.  updated frequently and accessed in its entirety relatively frequently?
            c.  updated frequently and accessed frequently in random order?
     12.4   For the B-tree in Figure 12.4c, show the result of inserting the key 97.
     12.5   An alternative algorithm for insertion into a B-tree is the following: As the insertion
            algorithm travels down the tree, each full node that is encountered is immediately
            split, even though it may turn out that the split was unnecessary.
            a.  What is the advantage of this technique?
            b.  What are the disadvantages?
     12.6   Both the search and the insertion time for a B-tree are a function of the height of the
            tree. We would like to develop a measure of the worst-case search or insertion time.
            Consider a B-tree of degree d that contains a total of n keys. Develop an inequality
            that shows an upper bound on the height h of the tree as a function of d and n.
     12.7   Ignoring overhead for directories and file descriptors, consider a file system in which
            files are stored in blocks of 16K bytes. For each of the following file sizes, calculate
            the percentage of wasted file space due to incomplete filling of the last block: 41,600
            bytes; 640,000 bytes; 4.064,000 bytes.
     12.8   What are the advantages of using directories?
     12.9   Directories can be implemented either as "special files" that can only be accessed in
            limited ways or as ordinary data files. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
            each approach?
     12.10  Some operating systems have a tree­structured file system but limit the depth of the
            tree to some small number of levels. What effect does this limit have on users? How
            does this simplify file system design (if it does)?
     12.11  Consider a hierarchical file system in which free disk space is kept in a free space list.
            a.  Suppose the pointer to free space is lost. Can the system reconstruct the free
                space list?
            b.  Suggest a scheme to ensure that the pointer is never lost as a result of a single
                memory failure.
     12.12  In UNIX System V, the length of a block is 1 Kbyte, and each block can hold a total of
            256 block addresses. Using the inode scheme, what is the maximum size of a file?
     12.13  Consider the organization of a UNIX file as represented by the inode (Figure 12.16).
            Assume that there are 12 direct block pointers, and a singly, doubly, and triply indirect
            pointer in each inode. Further, assume that the system block size and the disk sector
            size are both 8K. If the disk block pointer is 32 bits, with 8 bits to identify the physical
            disk and 24 bits to identify the physical block, then
            a.  What is the maximum file size supported by this system?
            b.  What is the maximum file system partition supported by this system?
            c.  Assuming no information other than that the file inode is already in main memory,
                how many disk accesses are required to access the byte in position 13,423,956?

                                       CHAPTER
EMBEDDED OPERATING SYSTEMS
13.1  Embedded Systems
13.2  Characteristics of Embedded Operating Systems
            Adapting an Existing Commercial Operating  System
            Purpose-Built Embedded Operating System
13.3  eCos
            Configurability
            eCos Components
            eCos Scheduler
            eCos Thread Synchronization
13.4  TinyOS
            Wireless Sensor Networks
            TinyOS Goals
            TinyOS Components
            TinyOS Scheduler
            Example Configuration
            TinyOS Resource Interface
13.5  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
13.6  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                               573
