Summary

A file management system is a set of system software that provides services to users
and applications in the use of files, including file access, directory maintenance, and
access control. The file management system is typically viewed as a system service
that itself is served by the operating system, rather than being part of the operating
system itself. However, in any system, at least part of the file management function
is performed by the operating system.
           A file consists of a collection of records. The way in which these records may
be accessed determines its logical organization, and to some extent its physical orga-
nization on disk. If a file is primarily to be processed as a whole, then a sequential
file organization is the simplest and most appropriate. If sequential access is needed
but random access to individual file is also desired, then an indexed sequential file
may give the best performance. If access to the file is principally at random, then an
indexed file or hashed file may be the most appropriate.
           Whatever file structure is chosen, a directory service is also needed. This
allows files to be organized in a hierarchical fashion. This organization is useful to
the user in keeping track of files and is useful to the file management system in pro-
viding access control and other services to users.
           File records, even when of fixed size, generally do not conform to the size of a
physical disk block. Accordingly, some sort of blocking strategy is needed. A trade-
off among complexity, performance, and space utilization determines the blocking
strategy to be used.
           A key function of any file management scheme is the management of disk
space. Part of this function is the strategy for allocating disk blocks to a file. A vari-
ety of methods have been employed, and a variety of data structures have been used
to keep track of the allocation for each file. In addition, the space on disk that has
not been allocated must be managed. This latter function primarily consists of main-
taining a disk allocation table indicating which blocks are free.

