Embedded Operating Systems

13.1  Embedded Systems
13.2  Characteristics of Embedded Operating Systems
            Adapting an Existing Commercial Operating  System
            Purpose-Built Embedded Operating System
13.3  eCos
            Configurability
            eCos Components
            eCos Scheduler
            eCos Thread Synchronization
13.4  TinyOS
            Wireless Sensor Networks
            TinyOS Goals
            TinyOS Components
            TinyOS Scheduler
            Example Configuration
            TinyOS Resource Interface
13.5  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
13.6  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                               573

        In brief, the conventional arguments that bird brains are too small
        or do not have particular structures needed for intelligence are based
        on ignorance of brains in general and bird brains in particular. It is
        unwarranted to argue that the small brains and small bodies of birds
        render them less capable of behaving with intelligent awareness than
        animals with large brains and large bodies.
                          --THE HUMAN NATURE OF BIRDS, Theodore Barber
     LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
     路  Explain the concept of embedded system.
     路  Understand the characteristics of embedded operating systems.
     路  Describe the architecture and key features of eCos.
     路  Describe the architecture and key features of TinyOS.
     In this chapter, we examine one of the most important and widely used catego-
     ries of operating systems: embedded operating systems. The embedded system
     environment places unique and demanding requirements on the OS and calls for
     design strategies quite different than that found in ordinary operating systems.
        We begin with an overview of the concept of embedded systems and then
     turn to an examination of the principles of embedded operating systems. Finally,
     this chapter surveys two very different approaches to embedded OS design.
