Embedded Systems

     The term embedded system refers to the use of electronics and software within a
     product, as opposed to a general-purpose computer, such as a laptop or desktop
     system. The following is a good general definition:1
     Embedded system: A combination of computer hardware and software, and
     perhaps additional mechanical or other parts, designed to perform a dedicated
     function. In many cases, embedded systems are part of a larger system or prod-
     uct, as in the case of an antilock braking system in a car.
        Embedded systems far outnumber general-purpose computer systems, encom-
     passing a broad range of applications (Table 13.1). These systems have widely varying
     requirements and constraints, such as the following [GRIM05]:
         Small to large systems, implying very different cost constraints, thus different
        needs for optimization and reuse
     1Michael Barr, Embedded Systems Glossary. Netrino Technical Library. http://www.netrino.com/Embedded-
     Systems/Glossary

Table 13.1  Examples    of  Embedded Systems and Their Markets [NOER05]
Market                      Embedded Device
Automotive                  Ignition system
                            Engine control
                            Brake system
Consumer electronics        Cell phones
                            mp3 players
                            ebook readers
                            Digital and analog televisions
                            Set-top boxes (DVDs, VCRs, Cable boxes)
                            Kitchen appliances (refrigerators, toasters, microwave ovens)
                            Automobiles
                            Toys/games
                            Telephones/cell phones/pagers
                            Cameras
                            Global positioning systems
Industrial control          Robotics and controls systems for manufacturing
                            Sensors
Medical                     Infusion pumps
                            Dialysis machines
                            Prosthetic devices
                            Cardiac monitors
Office automation           Fax machine
                            Photocopier
                            Printers
                            Monitors
                            Scanners
  Relaxed to very strict requirements and combinations of different quality
   requirements, for example, with respect to safety, reliability, real-time,
   flexibility, and legislation
  Short to long lifetimes
  Different environmental conditions in terms of, for example, radiation, vibra-
   tions, and humidity
  Different application characteristics resulting in static versus dynamic loads,
   slow to fast speed, compute versus interface intensive tasks, and/or combinations
   thereof
  Different models of computation ranging from discrete-event systems to those
   involving continuous time dynamics (usually referred to as hybrid systems)
   Often, embedded systems are tightly coupled to their environment. This can
give rise to real-time constraints imposed by the need to interact with the environ-
ment. Constraints, such as required speeds of motion, required precision of meas-
urement, and required time durations, dictate the timing of software operations. If
multiple activities must be managed simultaneously, this imposes more complex
real-time constraints.

                                  Software                      Auxiliary
                                                                systems
                           FPGA/            Memory              (power,
                           ASIC                                 cooling)
                     Human                  Processor           Diagnostic
                     interface                                  port
                     A/D                                        D/A
                     conversion                                 conversion
                                    Electromechanical
                                    backup and safety
                     Sensors                                    Actuators
                                            External
                                            environment
                     Figure 13.1  Possible Organization of  an  Embedded System
         Figure 13.1, based on [KOOP96], shows in general terms an embedded system
      organization. In addition to the processor and memory, there are a number of
      elements that differ from the typical desktop or laptop computer:
        There may be a variety of interfaces that enable the system to measure,
         manipulate, and otherwise interact with the external environment.
        The human interface may be as simple as a flashing light or as complicated as
         real-time robotic vision.
        The diagnostic port may be used for diagnosing the system that is being
         controlled--not just for diagnosing the embedded computer.
        Special-purpose field programmable (FPGA), application specific (ASIC), or
         even nondigital hardware may be used to increase performance or safety.
        Software often has a fixed function and is specific to the application.
