 . . . process migration a logical extension of computation migration is process migration. when a process is submitted for execution it is not always executed at the site at which it is initiated. the entire process or parts of it may be executed at different sites. this scheme may be used for several reasons load balancing. the processes or subprocesses may be distributed across the network to even the workload. computation speedup. if a single process can be divided into a number of subprocesses that can run concurrently on different sites then the total process turnaround time can be reduced. hardware preference. the process may have characteristics that make it more suitable for execution on some specialized processor such as matrix inversion on an array processor rather than on a microprocessor . software preference. the process may require software that is available at only a particular site and either the software cannot be moved or it is less expensive to move the process. data access. just as in computation migration if the data being used in the computation are numerous it may be more efficient to have a process run remotely than to transfer all the data. we use two complementary techniques to move processes in a computer network. in the first the system can attempt to hide the fact that the process has migrated from the client. this scheme has the advantage that the user does not need to code her program explicitly to accomplish the migration. this method is usually employed for achieving load balancing and computation speedup among homogeneous systems as they do not need user input to help them execute programs remotely. the other approach is to allow or require the user to specify explicitly how the process should migrate. this method is usually employed when the process must be moved to satisfy a hardware or software preference. you have probably realized that the web has many aspects of a distributedcomputing environment. certainly it provides data migration between a web server and a web client . it also provides computation migration. for instance a web client could trigger a database operation on a web server. finally with java it provides a form of process migration java applets are sent from the server to the client where they are executed. a network operating system provides most of these features but a distributed operating system makes them seamless and easily accessible. the result is a powerful and easy to use facility one of the reasons for the huge growth of the world wide web. . network structure there are basically two types of networks local area networks lan and wide area networks wan . the main difference between the two is the way in which they are geographically distributed. local area networks are composed chapter distributed system structures of processors distributed over small areas such as a single building? or a number of adjacent buildings whereas wide area networks are composed of a number of autonomous processors distributed over a large area such as the united states . these differences imply major variations in the speed and reliability of the communications network and they are reflected in the distributed operating system design. . . local area networks local area networks emerged in the early s as a substitute for large mainframe computer systems. for many enterprises it is more economical to have a number of small computers each with its own self contained applications than to have a single large system. because each small computer is likely to need a full complement of peripheral devices such as disks and printers and because some form of data sharing is likely to occur in a single enterprise it was a natural step to connect these small systems into a network. lans as mentioned are usually designed to cover a small geographical area such as a single building or a few adjacent buildings and are generally used in an office environment. all the sites in such systems are close to one another so the communication links tend to have a higher speed and lower error rate than do their counterparts in wide area networks. high quality expensive cables are needed to attain this higher speed and reliability. it is also possible to use the cable exclusively for data network traffic. over longer distances the cost of using high quality cable is enormous and the exclusive use of the cable tends to be prohibitive. r jr application server workstation workstation workstation gateway printer laptop file server figure . local area network. ' . network structure the most common links in a local area network are twisted pair and fiberoptic cabling. the most common configurations are multiaccess bus ring and star networks. communication speeds range from megabit per second for networks such as appletalk infrared and the new bluetooth local radio network to gigabit per second for gigabit ethernet. ten megabits per second is most common and is the speed of lobaset ethernet. baset ethernet requires a higher quality cable but runs at megabits per second and is becoming common. also growing is the use of optical fiber based fddi networking. the fddi network is token based and runs at over megabits per second. a typical lan may consist of a number of different computers from mainframes to laptops or pdas various shared peripheral devices such as laser printers and magnetic tape drives and one or more gateways specialized processors that provide access to other networks figure . . an ethernet scheme is commonly vised to construct lans. an ethernet network has no central controller because it is a multiaccess bus so new hosts can be added easily to the network. the ethernet protocol is defined by the ieee . standard. . . wide area networks wide area networks emerged in the late s mainly as an academic research project to provide efficient communication among sites allowing hardware and software to be shared conveniently and economically by a wide community of visers. the first wan to be designed and developed was the arpanet. begun in the arpanet has grown from a four site experimental network to a worldwide network of networks the internet comprising millions of computer systems. because the sites in a wan are physically distributed over a large geographical area the communication links are by default relatively slow and unreliable. typical links are telephone lines leased dedicated data lines microwave links and satellite channels. these commvmication links are controlled by special communication processors figure . which are responsible for defining the interface through which the sites communicate over the network as well as for transferring information among the various sites. for example the internet wan provides the ability for hosts at geographj ically separated sites to communicate with one another. the host computers typically differ from one another in type speed word length operating system i and so on. hosts are generally on lans which are in turn connected to j the internet via regional networks. the regional networks such as nsfnet in the northeast united states are interlinked with routers section . . to form the worldwide network. connections between networks frequently j use a telephone system service called tl which provides a transfer rate of . megabits per second over a leased line. for sites requiring faster internet access tls are collected into multiple tl units that work in parallel to provide more throughput. for instance a t is composed of tl connections and has a transfer rate of megabits per second. the routers control the path each message takes through the net. this routing may be either dynamic to increase communication efficiency or static to reduce security risks or to allow communication charges to be computed. chapter distributed system structures usef processes network host i l i t i . v.. .. .risf .rit .l ..r f . . t . . j ' ' j communication host operating system . ' 'subsystem communication processor figure . communication processors in a wide area network. other wans use standard telephone lines as their primary means of communication. modems are devices that accept digital data from the computer side and convert it to the analog signals that the telephone system uses. a modem at the destination site converts the analog signal back to digital form and the destination receives the data. the unix news network uucp allows systems to communicate with each other at predetermined times via modems to exchange messages. the messages are then routed to other nearby systems and in this way either are propagated to all hosts on the network public messages or are transferred to their destination private messages . wans are generally slower than lans their transmission rates range from bits per second to over megabit per second. uucp has been superseded by ppp the point to point protocol. ppp functions over modem connections allowing home computers to be fully connected to the internet