 the sites in a distributed system can be connected physically in a variety of ways. each configuration has advantages and disadvantages. we can compare the configurations by using the following criteria installation cost. the cost of physically linking the sites in the system communication cost. the cost in time and money to send a message from site a to site b . network topology availability. the extent to which data can be accessed despite the failure of some links or sites the various topologies are depicted in figure . as graphs whose nodes correspond to sites. an edge from node a to node b corresponds to a direct communication link between the two sites. in a fully connected network each site is directly connected to every other site. however the number of links grows as the square of the number of sites resvilting in a huge installation cost. therefore fully connected networks are impractical in any large system. in a partially connected network direct links exist between some but not all pairs of sites. hence the installation cost of such a configuration is lower than that of the fully connected network. however if two sites a and b are not directly connected messages from one to the other must be routed through a sequence of communication links. this requirement results in a higher communication cost. fully connected network partially connected network tree structured network star network figure . network topology. chapter distributed system structures if a communication link fails messages that would have been transmitted across the link must be rerouted. in some cases another route through the network may be found so that the messages are able to reach their destination. in other cases a failure may mean that no connection exists between some pairs of sites. when a system is split into two or more subsystems that lack any connection between them it is partitioned. under this definition a subsystem or partition may consist of a single node. the various partially connected network types include tree structured networks ring networks and star networks as shown in figure . . they have different failure characteristics and installation and communication costs. installation and communication costs are relatively low for a tree structured network. however the failure of a single link in such a network can result in the network's becoming partitioned. in a ring network at least two links must fail for partition to occur. thus the ring network has a higher degree of availability than does a tree structured network. however the communication cost is high since a message may have to cross a large number of links. in a star network the failure of a single link results in a network partition but one of the partitions has only a single site. such a partition can be treated as a single site failure. the star network also has a low communication cost since each site is at most two links away from every other site. however if the central site fails every site in the system becomes disconnected