Recommended Reading and Web Sites
                             13.5 / RECOMMENDED READING AND WEB SITES                       603
      the resource, use it, and then release the resource. The shared resource configuration
      provides the following interfaces to a client:
        Resource: The client issues a request at this interface, requesting access to the
         resource. If the resource is currently locked, the arbiter places the request in a
         queue. When a client is finished with the resource, it issues a release command
         at this interface.
        Resource requested: This is similar to the Resource interface. In this case, the
         client is able to hold on to a resource until the client is notified that someone
         else needs the resource.
        Resource configure: This interface allows a resource to be automatically
         configured just before a client is granted access to it. Components providing
         the ResourceConfigure interface use the interfaces provided by an under-
         lying dedicated resource to configure it into one of its desired modes of
         operation.
        Resource-specific interfaces: Once a client has access to a resource, it uses
         resource-specific interfaces to exchange data and control information with the
         resource.
         In addition to the dedicated resource, the shared resource configuration con-
      sists of two components. The Arbiter accepts requests for access and configuration
      from a client and enforces the lock on the underlying resource. The shared resource
      component mediates data exchange between the client and the underlying resource.
      Arbiter information passed from the arbiter to the shared resource component con-
      trols the access of the client to the underlying resource.
13.5  RECOMMENDED READING AND WEB SITES
      [KOOP96] provides a systematic discussion of the requirements for embedded
      systems. [STAN96] is a useful overview of real-time and embedded systems.
         [MASS03] and [ECOS07] both provide a detailed description of eCos internals.
      [THOM01] provides a brief overview with some code examples from the kernel.
      [LARM05] gives a more detailed description of the eCos configuration process.
         [HILL00] gives an overview and design rationale for TinyOS. [GAY05] is an
      interesting discussion of software design strategies using TinyOS. [BUON01] provides
      a good example of the use of TinyOS in building a network or wireless sensors. Two
      excellent references for the current version of TinyOS are [GAY03] and [LEVI05].
      BUON01  Buonadonna, P. Hill, J. and Culler, D. "Active Message Communication for
         Tiny Networked Sensors." Proceedings, IEEE INFOCOM 2001, April 2001
      ECOS07  eCosCentric Limited, and Red Hat, Inc. eCos Reference Manual, 2007. http://
         www.ecoscentric.com/ecospro/doc/html/ref/ecos-ref.html
      GAY03   Gay, D., et al. "The nesC Language: A Holistic Approach to Networked
         Embedded Systems." Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2003 Conference on
         Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2003.

604   CHAPTER 13 / EMBEDDED OPERATING SYSTEMS
      GAY05   Gay, D., Levis, P., and Culler, D. "Software Design Patterns for TinyOS."
            Proceedings, Conference on Languages, Compilers, and Tools for Embedded
            Systems, 2005.
      HILL00  Hill, J., et al. "System Architecture Directions for Networked Sensors."
            Proceedings, Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
            Systems, 2000.
      KOOP96  Koopman, P. "Embedded System Design Issues (the Rest of the Story)."
            Proceedings, 1996 International Conference on Computer Design, 1996.
      LARM05  Larmour, J. "How eCos Can Be Shrunk to Fit." Embedded Systems Europe,
            May 2005. www.embedded.com/europe/esemay05.htm
      LEVI05  Levis, P., et al. "T2: A Second Generation OS for Embedded Sensor
            Networks." Technical Report TKN-05-007, Telecommunication Networks Group,
            Technische Universitat Berlin, 2005. http://csl.stanford.edu/~pal/pubs.html
      MASS03  Massa, A. Embedded Software Development with eCos. Upper Saddle River,
            NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003.
      STAN96  Stankovic, J., et al. "Strategic Directions in Real-Time and Embedded
            Systems." ACM Computing Surveys, December 1996.
      THOM01  Thomas, G. "eCos: An Operating System for Embedded Systems." Dr.
            Dobb's Journal, January 2001.
      Recommended Web sites:
           Embedded.com: Wide variety of information on embedded systems
           eCos: Downloadable software, information, and links on eCos
           TinyOS Community Forum: Downloadable software, information, and links on TinyOS
13.6 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
eCos                        embedded system
embedded operating system   TinyOS
      Review Questions
      13.1  What is an embedded system?
      13.2  What are some typical requirements or constraints on embedded systems?
      13.3  What is an embedded OS?
      13.4  What are some of the key characteristics of an embedded OS?
