 when we are designing a communication network we must deal with the inherent complexity of coordinating asynchronous operations communicating in a potentially slow and error prone environment. in addition the systems on the network must agree on a protocol or a set of protocols for determining host names locating hosts on the network establishing connections and so on. we can simplify the design problem and related implementation by partitioning the problem into multiple layers. each layer on one system communicates with the equivalent layer on other systems. typically each layer has its own protocols and communication takes place between peer layers using a specific protocol. the protocols may be implemented in hardware or software. for instance figure . shows the logical communications between two computers with the three lowest level layers implemented in hardware. following the international standards organization iso we refer to the layers as follows . physical layer. the physical layer is responsible for handling both the mechanical and the electrical details of the physical transmission of a bit stream. at the physical layer the communicating systems must agree on the electrical representation of a binary and so that when data are . communication protocols computer a computer b application layer a l ? presentation layer p l session layer s m transport layer t l network layer m l link layer t l physical layer data network network environment iso environment real systems environment figure . two computers communicating via the iso network model. sent as a stream of electrical signals the receiver is able to interpret the data properly as binary data. this layer is implemented in the hardware of the networking device. . data link layer. the data link layer is responsible for handling ram ?s or fixed length parts of packets including any error detection and recovery that occurred in the physical layer. . network layer. the network layer is responsible for providing connections and for routing packets in the communication network including handling the addresses of outgoing packets decoding the addresses of incoming packets and maintaining routing information for proper response to changing load levels. routers work at this layer. . transport layer. the transport layer is responsible for low level access to the network and for transfer of messages between clients including partitioning messages into packets maintaining packet order controlling flow and generating physical addresses. . session layer. the session layer is responsible for implementing sessions or process to process communication protocols. typically these protocols are the actual communications for remote logins and for file and mail transfers. . presentation layer. the presentation layer is responsible for resolving the differences in formats among the various sites in the network including character conversions and half duplex full duplex modes character echoing . . application layer. the application layer is responsible for interacting directly with users. this layer deals with file transfer remote login protocols and electronic mail as well as with schemas for distributed databases. chapter distributed system structures figure . summarizes the iso protocol stack a set of cooperating protocols showing the physical flow of data. as mentioned logically each layer of a protocol stack communicates with the equivalent layer on other systems. but physically a message starts at or above the application layer and is passed through each lower level in turn. each layer may modify the message and include message header data for the equivalent layer on the receiving side. ultimately the message reaches the data network layer and is transferred as one or more packets figure . . the data link layer of the target system receives these data and the message is moved up through the protocol stack it is analyzed modified and stripped of headers as it progresses. it finally reaches the application layer for use by the receiving process. the iso model formalizes some of the earlier work done in network protocols but was developed in the late s and is currently not in widespread use. perhaps the most widely adopted protocol stack is the tcp ip model which end user application process distributed information services file transfer access and management document and message interchange application layer job transfer and manipulation syntax independent message interchange service i transfer syntax negotiation presentation layer data representation transformations dialog and synchronization session layer control for application entities network independent i message interchange service! end to end message transfer connection management error control transport layer fragmentation flow control network routing addressing network layer call set up and clearing data link control link layer framing data transparency error control mechanical and electrical physical layer network interface connections if physical connection to if network termination equipment!! data communication network figure . the iso protocol stack