Computer Security Threats

14.1  Computer Security Concepts
14.2  Threats, Attacks, and Assets
      Threats and Attacks
      Threats and Assets
14.3  Intruders
      Intruder Behavior Patterns
      Intrusion Techniques
14.4  Malicious Software Overview
      Backdoor
      Logic Bomb
      Trojan Horse
      Mobile Code
      Multiple-Threat Malware
14.5  Viruses, Worms, and Bots
      Viruses
      Worms
      Bots
14.6  Rootkits
      Rootkit Installation
      System-Level Call Attacks
14.6  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
14.7  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                          607

         The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy's
         not coming, but on our own readiness to receive him; not on the chance
         of his not attacking, but rather on the fact that we have made our
         position unassailable.
                                                           --THE ART OF WAR, Sun Tzu
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
        List and explain the key concepts that comprise computer security.
        Understand the spectrum of computer security attacks.
        Distinguish among various types of intruder behavior patterns and under-
         stand the types of intrusion techniques used to breach computer security.
        Summarize the principal types of malicious software.
        Present an overview of viruses, including typical virus structure and typical
         virus behavior.
        Understand the security threat posed by worms.
        Understand the security threat posed by bots.
        Explain key aspects of rootkits.
      This chapter provides an overview of security threats. We begin with a discus-
      sion of what we mean by computer security. In essence, computer security deals
      with computer-related assets that are subject to a variety of threats and for which
      various measures are taken to protect those assets. The remainder of the chap-
      ter looks at the two broad categories of computer and network security threats:
      intruders and malicious software.
         Cryptographic algorithms, such as encryption and hash functions, play a role
      both in computer security threats and computer security techniques. Appendix K
      provides an overview of these algorithms.
