Computer Security Concepts
         The art of war teaches us to rely not on the likelihood of the enemy's
         not coming, but on our own readiness to receive him; not on the chance
         of his not attacking, but rather on the fact that we have made our
         position unassailable.
                                                           --THE ART OF WAR, Sun Tzu
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
        List and explain the key concepts that comprise computer security.
        Understand the spectrum of computer security attacks.
        Distinguish among various types of intruder behavior patterns and under-
         stand the types of intrusion techniques used to breach computer security.
        Summarize the principal types of malicious software.
        Present an overview of viruses, including typical virus structure and typical
         virus behavior.
        Understand the security threat posed by worms.
        Understand the security threat posed by bots.
        Explain key aspects of rootkits.
      This chapter provides an overview of security threats. We begin with a discus-
      sion of what we mean by computer security. In essence, computer security deals
      with computer-related assets that are subject to a variety of threats and for which
      various measures are taken to protect those assets. The remainder of the chap-
      ter looks at the two broad categories of computer and network security threats:
      intruders and malicious software.
         Cryptographic algorithms, such as encryption and hash functions, play a role
      both in computer security threats and computer security techniques. Appendix K
      provides an overview of these algorithms.
14.1  COMPUTER SECURITY CONCEPTS
      The NIST Computer Security Handbook [NIST95] defines the term computer
      security as follows:
      Computer security: The protection afforded to an automated information system
      in order to attain the applicable objectives of preserving the integrity, availability,
      and confidentiality of information system resources (includes hardware, software,
      firmware, information/data, and telecommunications).

   This definition introduces three key objectives that are at the heart of compu-
ter security:
  Confidentiality: This term covers two related concepts:
   -- Data1 confidentiality: Assures that private or confidential information is
   not made available or disclosed to unauthorized individuals
   -- Privacy: Assures that individuals control or influence what information
   related to them may be collected and stored and by whom and to whom
   that information may be disclosed
  Integrity: This term covers two related concepts:
   -- Data integrity: Assures that information and programs are changed only in
   a specified and authorized manner
   -- System integrity: Assures that a system performs its intended function in
   an unimpaired manner, free from deliberate or inadvertent unauthorized
   manipulation of the system
  Availability: Assures that systems work promptly and service is not denied to
   authorized users
   These three concepts form what is often referred to as the CIA triad (Figure 14.1).
The three concepts embody the fundamental security objectives for both data and
for information and computing services. For example, the NIST standard FIPS 199
(Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems)
lists confidentiality, integrity, and availability as the three security objectives for infor-
mation and for information systems. FIPS PUB 199 provides a useful characterization
                        Confidentiality  Data          Integrity
                                         and
                                         services
                                         Availability
                        Figure 14.1  The Security Requirements Triad
1RFC 2828 (Internet Security Glossary) defines information as "facts and ideas, which can be represented
(encoded) as various forms of data," and data as "information in a specific physical representation, usu-
ally a sequence of symbols that have meaning; especially a representation of information that can be
processed or produced by a computer." Security literature typically does not make much of a distinction:
nor does this chapter.

     of these three objectives in terms of requirements and the definition of a loss of security
     in each category:
       Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on information access
        and disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and propri-
        etary information. A loss of confidentiality is the unauthorized disclosure of
        information.
       Integrity: Guarding against improper information modification or destruction,
        including ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity. A loss of
        integrity is the unauthorized modification or destruction of information.
       Availability: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.
        A loss of availability is the disruption of access to or use of information or an
        information system.
        Although the use of the CIA triad to define security objectives is well estab-
     lished, some in the security field feel that additional concepts are needed to present
     a complete picture. Two of the most commonly mentioned are as follows:
       Authenticity: The property of being genuine and being able to be verified and
        trusted; confidence in the validity of a transmission, a message, or message
        originator. This means verifying that users are who they say they are and that
        each input arriving at the system came from a trusted source.
       Accountability: The security goal that generates the requirement for actions
        of an entity to be traced uniquely to that entity. This supports nonrepu-
        diation, deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention,
        and after-action recovery and legal action. Because truly secure systems
        aren't yet an achievable goal, we must be able to trace a security breach to
        a responsible party. Systems must keep records of their activities to permit
        later forensic analysis to trace security breaches or to aid in transaction
        disputes.
        Note that FIPS PUB 199 includes authenticity under integrity.
14.2 THREATS, ATTACKS, AND ASSETS
     We turn now to a look at threats, attacks, and assets as related to computer security.
     Threats and Attacks
     Table 14.1, based on RFC 2828, describes four kinds of threat consequences and
     lists the kinds of attacks that result in each consequence.
        Unauthorized disclosure is a threat to confidentiality. The following types of
     attacks can result in this threat consequence:
       Exposure: This can be deliberate, as when an insider intentionally releases sensi-
        tive information, such as credit card numbers, to an outsider. It can also be the
        result of a human, hardware, or software error, which results in an entity gaining
        unauthorized knowledge of sensitive data. There have been numerous instances
