Threats, Attacks, and Assets
610  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
     of these three objectives in terms of requirements and the definition of a loss of security
     in each category:
       Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on information access
        and disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and propri-
        etary information. A loss of confidentiality is the unauthorized disclosure of
        information.
       Integrity: Guarding against improper information modification or destruction,
        including ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity. A loss of
        integrity is the unauthorized modification or destruction of information.
       Availability: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.
        A loss of availability is the disruption of access to or use of information or an
        information system.
        Although the use of the CIA triad to define security objectives is well estab-
     lished, some in the security field feel that additional concepts are needed to present
     a complete picture. Two of the most commonly mentioned are as follows:
       Authenticity: The property of being genuine and being able to be verified and
        trusted; confidence in the validity of a transmission, a message, or message
        originator. This means verifying that users are who they say they are and that
        each input arriving at the system came from a trusted source.
       Accountability: The security goal that generates the requirement for actions
        of an entity to be traced uniquely to that entity. This supports nonrepu-
        diation, deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention,
        and after-action recovery and legal action. Because truly secure systems
        aren't yet an achievable goal, we must be able to trace a security breach to
        a responsible party. Systems must keep records of their activities to permit
        later forensic analysis to trace security breaches or to aid in transaction
        disputes.
        Note that FIPS PUB 199 includes authenticity under integrity.
14.2 THREATS, ATTACKS, AND ASSETS
     We turn now to a look at threats, attacks, and assets as related to computer security.
     Threats and Attacks
     Table 14.1, based on RFC 2828, describes four kinds of threat consequences and
     lists the kinds of attacks that result in each consequence.
        Unauthorized disclosure is a threat to confidentiality. The following types of
     attacks can result in this threat consequence:
       Exposure: This can be deliberate, as when an insider intentionally releases sensi-
        tive information, such as credit card numbers, to an outsider. It can also be the
        result of a human, hardware, or software error, which results in an entity gaining
        unauthorized knowledge of sensitive data. There have been numerous instances

                                                    14.2 / THREATS, ATTACKS, AND ASSETS                      611
Table 14.1  Threat Consequences, and the Types of Threat Actions that Cause Each Consequence
            (Based on RFC 2828)
Threat Consequence                                  Threat Action (Attack)
Unauthorized Disclosure                             Exposure: Sensitive data are directly released to an
A circumstance or event whereby an entity           unauthorized entity.
gains access to data for which the entity is not    Interception: An unauthorized entity directly
authorized.                                         accesses sensitive data, traveling between authorized
                                                    sources and destinations.
                                                    Inference: A threat action whereby an unauthor-
                                                    ized entity indirectly accesses sensitive data (but not
                                                    necessarily the data contained in the communication)
                                                    by reasoning from characteristics or by-products of
                                                    communications.
                                                    Intrusion: An unauthorized entity gains access to
                                                    sensitive data by circumventing a system's security
                                                    protections.
Deception                                           Masquerade: An unauthorized entity gains access to
A circumstance or event that may result in          a system or performs a malicious act by posing as an
an authorized entity receiving false data and       authorized entity.
believing it to be true.                            Falsification: False data deceive an authorized entity.
                                                    Repudiation: An entity deceives another by falsely
                                                    denying responsibility for an act.
Disruption                                          Incapacitation: Prevents or interrupts system opera-
A circumstance or event that interrupts or          tion by disabling a system component.
prevents the correct operation of system services   Corruption: Undesirably alters system operation by
and functions.                                      adversely modifying system functions or data.
                                                    Obstruction: A threat action that interrupts delivery
                                                    of system services by hindering system operation.
Usurpation                                          Misappropriation: An entity assumes unauthorized
A circumstance or event that results in control of  logical or physical control of a system resource.
system services or functions by an unauthorized     Misuse: Causes a system component to perform a func-
entity.                                             tion or service that is detrimental to system security.
               of this, such as universities accidentally posting student confidential information
               on the Web.
              Interception: Interception is a common attack in the context of communica-
               tions. On a shared local area network (LAN), such as a wireless LAN or a
               broadcast Ethernet, any device attached to the LAN can receive a copy of
               packets intended for another device. On the Internet, a determined hacker
               can gain access to e-mail traffic and other data transfers. All of these situations
               create the potential for unauthorized access to data.
              Inference: An example of inference is known as traffic analysis, in which an
               adversary is able to gain information from observing the pattern of traffic on
               a network, such as the amount of traffic between particular pairs of hosts on
               the network. Another example is the inference of detailed information from
               a database by a user who has only limited access; this is accomplished by
               repeated queries whose combined results enable inference.

612  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
      Intrusion: An example of intrusion is an adversary gaining unauthorized access
        to sensitive data by overcoming the system's access control protections.
        Deception is a threat to either system integrity or data integrity. The following
     types of attacks can result in this threat consequence:
       Masquerade: One example of masquerade is an attempt by an unauthor-
        ized user to gain access to a system by posing as an authorized user; this
        could happen if the unauthorized user has learned another user's logon ID
        and password. Another example is malicious logic, such as a Trojan horse,
        that appears to perform a useful or desirable function but actually gains
        unauthorized access to system resources or tricks a user into executing other
        malicious logic.
       Falsification: This refers to the altering or replacing of valid data or the intro-
        duction of false data into a file or database. For example, a student may alter
        his or her grades on a school database.
       Repudiation: In this case, a user either denies sending data or a user denies
        receiving or possessing the data.
        Disruption is a threat to availability or system integrity. The following types of
     attacks can result in this threat consequence:
       Incapacitation: This is an attack on system availability. This could occur as a
        result of physical destruction of or damage to system hardware. More typically,
        malicious software, such as Trojan horses, viruses, or worms, could operate in
        such a way as to disable a system or some of its services.
       Corruption: This is an attack on system integrity. Malicious software in this
        context could operate in such a way that system resources or services func-
        tion in an unintended manner. Or a user could gain unauthorized access to
        a system and modify some of its functions. An example of the latter is a user
        placing backdoor logic in the system to provide subsequent access to a system
        and its resources by other than the usual procedure.
       Obstruction: One way to obstruct system operation is to interfere with com-
        munications by disabling communication links or altering communication
        control information. Another way is to overload the system by placing excess
        burden on communication traffic or processing resources.
        Usurpation is a threat to system integrity. The following types of attacks can
     result in this threat consequence:
       Misappropriation: This can include theft of service. An example is a distrib-
        uted denial of service attack, when malicious software is installed on a number
        of hosts to be used as platforms to launch traffic at a target host. In this case,
        the malicious software makes unauthorized use of processor and operating
        system resources.
       Misuse: Misuse can occur either by means of malicious logic or a hacker that
        has gained unauthorized access to a system. In either case, security functions
        can be disabled or thwarted.

                                                           14.2 / THREATS, ATTACKS, AND ASSETS                 613
   Threats and Assets
   The assets of a computer system can be categorized as hardware, software, data,
   and communication lines and networks. In this subsection, we briefly describe these
   four categories and relate these to the concepts of integrity, confidentiality, and
   availability introduced in Section 14.1 (see Figure 14.2 and Table 14.2).
   HARDWARE                   A  major    threat     to    computer  system      hardware  is  the  threat     to
   availability. Hardware is the most vulnerable to attack and the least susceptible to
   automated controls. Threats include accidental and deliberate damage to equipment
   as well as theft. The proliferation of personal computers and workstations and the
   widespread use of LANs increase the potential for losses in this area. Theft of
   CD-ROMs and DVDs can lead to loss of confidentiality. Physical and administrative
   security measures are needed to deal with these threats.
   SOFTWARE                   Software includes the operating system, utilities, and application
   programs. A key threat to software is an attack on availability. Software, especially
   application software, is often easy to delete. Software can also be altered or
   damaged to render it useless. Careful software configuration management, which
   includes making backups of the most recent version of software, can maintain high
   availability. A more difficult problem to deal with is software modification that
   results in a program that still functions but that behaves differently than before,
   which is a threat to integrity/authenticity. Computer viruses and related attacks fall
   into this category. A final problem is protection against software piracy. Although
                       Computer system                                           Computer system
                                       4  Sensitive files
                                          must be secure
                                 Data     (file security)                               Data
1  Access to the data                                      3      Data must be
   must be controlled                                      securely transmitted
   (protection)                                            through networks
                                                           (network security)
                       Processes representing users                              Processes representing users
                       Guard                                                     Guard
                                 2        Access to the computer
                                       facility must be controlled
                                          (user authentication)
                              Users making requests
Figure 14.2  Scope of System Security

614    CHAPTER 14 /    COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
Table  14.2  Computer  and Network Assets, with Examples of Threats
                       Availability            Confidentiality         Integrity
             Hardware  Equipment is stolen or
                       disabled, thus denying
                       service.
             Software  Programs are deleted,   An unauthorized copy    A working program is modi-
                       denying access to       of software is made.    fied, either to cause it to fail
                       users.                                          during execution or to cause
                                                                       it to do some unintended task.
             Data      Files are deleted,      An unauthorized read    Existing files are modified or
                       denying access to       of data is performed.   new files are fabricated.
                       users.                  An analysis of sta-
                                               tistical data reveals
                                               underlying data.
Communication Lines    Messages are            Messages are read.      Messages are modified,
                       destroyed or deleted.   The traffic pattern of  delayed, reordered, or dupli-
                       Communication lines     messages is observed.   cated. False messages are
                       or networks are ren-                            fabricated.
                       dered unavailable.
       certain countermeasures are available, by and large the problem of unauthorized
       copying of software has not been solved.
       DATA  Hardware and software security are typically concerns of computing center
       professionals or individual concerns of personal computer users. A much more
       widespread problem is data security, which involves files and other forms of data
       controlled by individuals, groups, and business organizations.
             Security concerns with respect to data are broad, encompassing availability,
       secrecy, and integrity. In the case of availability, the concern is with the destruction
       of data files, which can occur either accidentally or maliciously.
             The obvious concern with secrecy is the unauthorized reading of data files or
       databases, and this area has been the subject of perhaps more research and effort
       than any other area of computer security. A less obvious threat to secrecy involves
       the analysis of data and manifests itself in the use of so-called statistical databases,
       which provide summary or aggregate information. Presumably, the existence of
       aggregate information does not threaten the privacy of the individuals involved.
       However, as the use of statistical databases grows, there is an increasing potential
       for disclosure of personal information. In essence, characteristics of constituent
       individuals may be identified through careful analysis. For example, if one table
       records the aggregate of the incomes of respondents A, B, C, and D and another
       records the aggregate of the incomes of A, B, C, D, and E, the difference between
       the two aggregates would be the income of E. This problem is exacerbated by the
       increasing desire to combine data sets. In many cases, matching several sets of data
       for consistency at different levels of aggregation requires access to individual units.
       Thus, the individual units, which are the subject of privacy concerns, are available at
       various stages in the processing of data sets.

                                  14.2 / THREATS, ATTACKS, AND ASSETS                      615
Finally, data integrity is a major concern in most installations. Modifications
to data files can have consequences ranging from minor to disastrous.
COMMUNICATION LINES AND NETWORKS            Network security attacks can be classified
as passive attacks and active attacks. A passive attack attempts to learn or make
use of information from the system but does not affect system resources. An active
attack attempts to alter system resources or affect their operation.
Passive attacks are in the nature of eavesdropping on, or monitoring of, trans-
missions. The goal of the attacker is to obtain information that is being transmitted.
Two types of passive attacks are release of message contents and traffic analysis.
The concept of release of message contents is easily understood. A telephone
conversation, an electronic mail message, and a transferred file may contain sensitive
or confidential information. We would like to prevent an opponent from learning the
contents of these transmissions.
Traffic analysis is a more subtle form of passive attack. Suppose that we had a
way of masking the contents of messages or other information traffic so that oppo-
nents, even if they captured the message, could not extract the information from
the message. The common technique for masking contents is encryption. If we had
encryption protection in place, an opponent might still be able to observe the pat-
tern of these messages. The opponent could determine the location and identity of
communicating hosts and could observe the frequency and length of messages being
exchanged. This information might be useful in guessing the nature of the commu-
nication that was taking place.
Passive attacks are very difficult to detect because they do not involve any
alteration of the data. Typically, the message traffic is sent and received in an appar-
ently normal fashion, and neither the sender nor the receiver is aware that a third
party has read the messages or observed the traffic pattern. However, it is feasible
to prevent the success of these attacks, usually by means of encryption. Thus, the
emphasis in dealing with passive attacks is on prevention rather than detection.
Active attacks involve some modification of the data stream or the creation
of a false stream and can be subdivided into four categories: replay, masquerade,
modification of messages, and denial of service.
Replay involves the passive capture of a data unit and its subsequent retrans-
mission to produce an unauthorized effect.
A masquerade takes place when one entity pretends to be a different entity. A
masquerade attack usually includes one of the other forms of active attack. For exam-
ple, authentication sequences can be captured and replayed after a valid authentica-
tion sequence has taken place, thus enabling an authorized entity with few privileges
to obtain extra privileges by impersonating an entity that has those privileges.
Modification of messages simply means that some portion of a legitimate
message is altered, or that messages are delayed or reordered, to produce an
unauthorized effect. For example, a message stating, "Allow John Smith to read con-
fidential file accounts" is modified to say, "Allow Fred Brown to read confidential
file accounts."
The denial of service prevents or inhibits the normal use or management of
communications facilities. This attack may have a specific target; for example, an
entity may suppress all messages directed to a particular destination (e.g., the security

616  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
     audit service). Another form of service denial is the disruption of an entire network,
     either by disabling the network or by overloading it with messages so as to degrade
     performance.
        Active attacks present the opposite characteristics of passive attacks. Whereas
     passive attacks are difficult to detect, measures are available to prevent their suc-
     cess. On the other hand, it is quite difficult to prevent active attacks absolutely,
     because to do so would require physical protection of all communications facilities
     and paths at all times. Instead, the goal is to detect them and to recover from any
     disruption or delays caused by them. Because the detection has a deterrent effect, it
     may also contribute to prevention.
14.3 INTRUDERS
     The concept of intruder was introduced in Section 3.6. [GRAN04] lists the follow-
     ing examples of intrusion:
       Performing a remote root compromise of an e-mail server
       Defacing a Web server
       Guessing and cracking passwords
       Copying a database containing credit card numbers
       Viewing sensitive data, including payroll records and medical information,
        without authorization
       Running a packet sniffer on a workstation to capture usernames and passwords
       Using a permission error on an anonymous FTP server to distribute pirated
        software and music files
       Dialing into an unsecured modem and gaining internal network access
       Posing as an executive, calling the help desk, resetting the executive's e-mail
        password, and learning the new password
       Using an unattended, logged-in workstation without permission
     Intruder Behavior Patterns
     The techniques and behavior patterns of intruders are constantly shifting, to exploit
     newly discovered weaknesses and to evade detection and countermeasures. Even
     so, intruders typically follow one of a number of recognizable behavior patterns,
     and these patterns typically differ from those of ordinary users. In the following,
     we look at three broad examples of intruder behavior patterns to give the reader
     some feel for the challenge facing the security administrator. Table 14.3, based on
     [RADC04], summarizes the behavior.
     HACKERS  Traditionally, those who hack into computers do so for the thrill of
     it or for status. The hacking community is a strong meritocracy in which status
     is determined by level of competence. Thus, attackers often look for targets of
     opportunity and then share the information with others. A typical example is a
