Intruders
616  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
     audit service). Another form of service denial is the disruption of an entire network,
     either by disabling the network or by overloading it with messages so as to degrade
     performance.
        Active attacks present the opposite characteristics of passive attacks. Whereas
     passive attacks are difficult to detect, measures are available to prevent their suc-
     cess. On the other hand, it is quite difficult to prevent active attacks absolutely,
     because to do so would require physical protection of all communications facilities
     and paths at all times. Instead, the goal is to detect them and to recover from any
     disruption or delays caused by them. Because the detection has a deterrent effect, it
     may also contribute to prevention.
14.3 INTRUDERS
     The concept of intruder was introduced in Section 3.6. [GRAN04] lists the follow-
     ing examples of intrusion:
       Performing a remote root compromise of an e-mail server
       Defacing a Web server
       Guessing and cracking passwords
       Copying a database containing credit card numbers
       Viewing sensitive data, including payroll records and medical information,
        without authorization
       Running a packet sniffer on a workstation to capture usernames and passwords
       Using a permission error on an anonymous FTP server to distribute pirated
        software and music files
       Dialing into an unsecured modem and gaining internal network access
       Posing as an executive, calling the help desk, resetting the executive's e-mail
        password, and learning the new password
       Using an unattended, logged-in workstation without permission
     Intruder Behavior Patterns
     The techniques and behavior patterns of intruders are constantly shifting, to exploit
     newly discovered weaknesses and to evade detection and countermeasures. Even
     so, intruders typically follow one of a number of recognizable behavior patterns,
     and these patterns typically differ from those of ordinary users. In the following,
     we look at three broad examples of intruder behavior patterns to give the reader
     some feel for the challenge facing the security administrator. Table 14.3, based on
     [RADC04], summarizes the behavior.
     HACKERS  Traditionally, those who hack into computers do so for the thrill of
     it or for status. The hacking community is a strong meritocracy in which status
     is determined by level of competence. Thus, attackers often look for targets of
     opportunity and then share the information with others. A typical example is a

                                                                          14.3 / INTRUDERS  617
Table 14.3  Some Examples of Intruder Patterns of Behavior
                                               (a) Hacker
1.  Select the target using IP lookup tools such as NSLookup, Dig, and others.
2.  Map network for accessible services using tools such as NMAP.
3.  Identify potentially vulnerable services (in this case, pcAnywhere).
4.  Brute force (guess) pcAnywhere password.
5.  Install remote administration tool called DameWare.
6.  Wait for administrator to log on and capture his or her password.
7.  Use that password to access remainder of network.
                                        (b) Criminal Enterprise
1.  Act quickly and precisely to make their activities harder to detect.
2.  Exploit perimeter through vulnerable ports.
3.  Use Trojan horses (hidden software) to leave backdoors for reentry.
4.  Use sniffers to capture passwords.
5.  Do not stick around until noticed.
6.  Make few or no mistakes.
                                          (c) Internal Threat
1.  Create network accounts for themselves and their friends.
2.  Access accounts and applications they wouldn't normally use for their daily jobs.
3.  E-mail former and prospective employers.
4.  Conduct furtive instant-messaging chats.
5.  Visit Web sites that cater to disgruntled employees, such as f'dcompany.com.
6.  Perform large downloads and file copying.
7.  Access the network during off hours.
break-in at a large financial institution reported in [RADC04]. The intruder took
advantage of the fact that the corporate network was running unprotected services,
some of which were not even needed. In this case, the key to the break-in was the
pcAnywhere application. The manufacturer, Symantec, advertises this program as
a remote control solution that enables secure connection to remote devices. But the
attacker had an easy time gaining access to pcAnywhere; the administrator used the
same three-letter username and password for the program. In this case, there was
no intrusion detection system on the 700-node corporate network. The intruder was
only discovered when a vice president walked into her office and saw the cursor
moving files around on her Windows workstation.
    Benign intruders might be tolerable, although they do consume resources and
may slow performance for legitimate users. However, there is no way in advance to
know whether an intruder will be benign or malign. Consequently, even for systems
with no particularly sensitive resources, there is a motivation to control this problem.
    Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) and intrusion prevention systems (IPSs),
of the type described in this Chapter 15, are designed to counter this type of hacker
threat. In addition to using such systems, organizations can consider restricting
remote logons to specific IP addresses and/or use virtual private network technology.

618  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
     One of the results of the growing awareness of the intruder problem has been
     the establishment of a number of computer emergency response teams (CERTs).
     These cooperative ventures collect information about system vulnerabilities and
     disseminate it to systems managers. Hackers also routinely read CERT reports.
     Thus, it is important for system administrators to quickly insert all software patches
     to discovered vulnerabilities. Unfortunately, given the complexity of many IT
     systems and the rate at which patches are released, this is increasingly difficult to
     achieve without automated updating. Even then, there are problems caused by
     incompatibilities resulting from the updated software (hence the need for multiple
     layers of defense in managing security threats to IT systems).
     CRIMINALS       Organized groups of hackers have become a widespread and common
     threat to Internet-based systems. These groups can be in the employ of a corporation
     or government but often are loosely affiliated gangs of hackers. Typically, these
     gangs are young, often Eastern European, Russian, or southeast Asian hackers who
     do business on the Web [ANTE06]. They meet in underground forums with names
     like DarkMarket.org and theftservices.com to trade tips and data and coordinate
     attacks. A common target is a credit card file at an e-commerce server. Attackers
     attempt to gain root access. The card numbers are used by organized crime gangs
     to purchase expensive items and are then posted to carder sites, where others can
     access and use the account numbers; this obscures usage patterns and complicates
     investigation.
     Whereas traditional hackers look for targets of opportunity, criminal hack-
     ers usually have specific targets, or at least classes of targets in mind. Once a site is
     penetrated, the attacker acts quickly, scooping up as much valuable information as
     possible and exiting.
     IDSs and IPSs can also be used for these types of attackers but may be less
     effective because of the quick in-and-out nature of the attack. For e-commerce
     sites, database encryption should be used for sensitive customer information,
     especially credit cards. For hosted e-commerce sites (provided by an outsider
     service), the e-commerce organization should make use of a dedicated server (not
     used to support multiple customers) and closely monitor the provider's security
     services.
     INSIDER    ATTACKS     Insider attacks are among the most difficult to detect and
     prevent. Employees already have access to and knowledge of the structure and
     content of corporate databases. Insider attacks can be motivated by revenge or
     simply a feeling of entitlement. An example of the former is the case of Kenneth
     Patterson, fired from his position as data communications manager for American
     Eagle Outfitters. Patterson disabled the company's ability to process credit card
     purchases during 5 days of the holiday season of 2002. As for a sense of entitlement,
     there have always been many employees who felt entitled to take extra office
     supplies for home use, but this now extends to corporate data. An example is that of
     a vice president of sales for a stock analysis firm who quit and went to a competitor.
     Before she left, she copied the customer database to take with her. The offender
     reported feeling no animus toward her former employee; she simply wanted the
     data because it would be useful to her.

                                     14.4 / MALICIOUS SOFTWARE OVERVIEW                      619
         Although IDS and IPS facilities can be useful in countering insider attacks,
      other more direct approaches are of higher priority. Examples include the following:
        Enforce least privilege, only allowing access to the resources employees need
         to do their job.
        Set logs to see what users access and what commands they are entering.
        Protect sensitive resources with strong authentication.
        Upon termination, delete employee's computer and network access.
        Upon termination, make a mirror image of employee's hard drive before reis-
         suing it. That evidence might be needed if your company information turns up
         at a competitor.
      Intrusion Techniques
      The objective of the intruder is to gain access to a system or to increase the range of
      privileges accessible on a system. Most initial attacks use system or software vulner-
      abilities that allow a user to execute code that opens a back door into the system.
      Intruders can get access to a system by exploiting attacks such as buffer overflows
      on a program that runs with certain privileges.
         Alternatively, the intruder attempts to acquire information that should have
      been protected. In some cases, this information is in the form of a user password.
      With knowledge of some other user's password, an intruder can log in to a system
      and exercise all the privileges accorded to the legitimate user. Password guessing
      and password acquisition techniques are discussed in Chapter 15.
14.4  MALICIOUS SOFTWARE OVERVIEW
      The concept of malicious software, or malware, was introduced in Section 3.6. Malware
      is software designed to cause damage to or use up the resources of a target computer.
      It is frequently concealed within or masquerades as legitimate software. In some cases,
      it spreads itself to other computers via e-mail or infected discs. The terminology in this
      area presents problems because of a lack of universal agreement on all of the terms
      and because some of the categories overlap. Table 14.4 is a useful guide.
         In this section, we briefly survey some of the key categories of malicious soft-
      ware, deferring discussion on the key topics of viruses, worms, bots, and rootkits
      until the following sections.
      Backdoor
      A backdoor, also known as a trapdoor, is a secret entry point into a program
      that allows someone who is aware of the backdoor to gain access without going
      through the usual security access procedures. Programmers have used backdoors
      legitimately for many years to debug and test programs; such a backdoor is called
      a maintenance hook. This usually is done when the programmer is developing an
      application that has an authentication procedure, or a long setup, requiring the user
      to enter many different values to run the application. To debug the program, the
