Malicious Software Overview
                                     14.4 / MALICIOUS SOFTWARE OVERVIEW                      619
         Although IDS and IPS facilities can be useful in countering insider attacks,
      other more direct approaches are of higher priority. Examples include the following:
        Enforce least privilege, only allowing access to the resources employees need
         to do their job.
        Set logs to see what users access and what commands they are entering.
        Protect sensitive resources with strong authentication.
        Upon termination, delete employee's computer and network access.
        Upon termination, make a mirror image of employee's hard drive before reis-
         suing it. That evidence might be needed if your company information turns up
         at a competitor.
      Intrusion Techniques
      The objective of the intruder is to gain access to a system or to increase the range of
      privileges accessible on a system. Most initial attacks use system or software vulner-
      abilities that allow a user to execute code that opens a back door into the system.
      Intruders can get access to a system by exploiting attacks such as buffer overflows
      on a program that runs with certain privileges.
         Alternatively, the intruder attempts to acquire information that should have
      been protected. In some cases, this information is in the form of a user password.
      With knowledge of some other user's password, an intruder can log in to a system
      and exercise all the privileges accorded to the legitimate user. Password guessing
      and password acquisition techniques are discussed in Chapter 15.
14.4  MALICIOUS SOFTWARE OVERVIEW
      The concept of malicious software, or malware, was introduced in Section 3.6. Malware
      is software designed to cause damage to or use up the resources of a target computer.
      It is frequently concealed within or masquerades as legitimate software. In some cases,
      it spreads itself to other computers via e-mail or infected discs. The terminology in this
      area presents problems because of a lack of universal agreement on all of the terms
      and because some of the categories overlap. Table 14.4 is a useful guide.
         In this section, we briefly survey some of the key categories of malicious soft-
      ware, deferring discussion on the key topics of viruses, worms, bots, and rootkits
      until the following sections.
      Backdoor
      A backdoor, also known as a trapdoor, is a secret entry point into a program
      that allows someone who is aware of the backdoor to gain access without going
      through the usual security access procedures. Programmers have used backdoors
      legitimately for many years to debug and test programs; such a backdoor is called
      a maintenance hook. This usually is done when the programmer is developing an
      application that has an authentication procedure, or a long setup, requiring the user
      to enter many different values to run the application. To debug the program, the

620    CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
Table 14.4    Terminology  of Malicious Programs
Name                       Description
Virus                      Malware that, when executed, tries to replicate itself into other executable
                           code; when it succeeds the code is said to be infected. When the infected code is
                           executed, the virus also executes.
Worm                       A computer program that can run independently and can propagate a complete
                           working version of itself onto other hosts on a network.
Logic bomb                 A program inserted into software by an intruder. A logic bomb lies dormant until
                           a predefined condition is met; the program then triggers an unauthorized act.
Trojan horse               A computer program that appears to have a useful function but also has a hidden
                           and potentially malicious function that evades security mechanisms, sometimes
                           by exploiting legitimate authorizations of a system entity that invokes the Trojan
                           horse program.
Backdoor (trapdoor)        Any mechanism that bypasses a normal security check; it may allow unauthorized
                           access to functionality.
Mobile code                Software (e.g., script, macro, or other portable instruction) that can be shipped
                           unchanged to a heterogeneous collection of platforms and execute with identical
                           semantics.
Exploits                   Code specific to a single vulnerability or set of vulnerabilities.
Downloaders                Program that installs other items on a machine that is under attack. Usually, a
                           downloader is sent in an e-mail.
Auto-rooter                Malicious hacker tools used to break into new machines remotely.
Kit (virus generator)      Set of tools for generating new viruses automatically.
Spammer programs           Used to send large volumes of unwanted e-mail.
Flooders                   Used to attack networked computer systems with a large volume of traffic to
                           carry out a denial-of-service (DoS) attack.
Keyloggers                 Captures keystrokes on a compromised system.
Rootkit                    Set of hacker tools used after attacker has broken into a computer system and
                           gained root-level access.
Zombie, bot                Program activated on an infected machine that is activated to launch attacks on
                           other machines.
Spyware                    Software that collects information from a computer and transmits it to another
                           system.
Adware                     Advertising that is integrated into software. It can result in pop-up ads or
                           redirection of a browser to a commercial site.
          developer may wish to gain special privileges or to avoid all the necessary setup and
          authentication. The programmer may also want to ensure that there is a method of
          activating the program should something be wrong with the authentication proce-
          dure that is being built into the application. The backdoor is code that recognizes
          some special sequence of input or is triggered by being run from a certain user ID or
          by an unlikely sequence of events.
              Backdoors become threats when unscrupulous programmers use them to
          gain unauthorized access. The backdoor was the basic idea for the vulnerability

                            14.4 / MALICIOUS SOFTWARE OVERVIEW                        621
portrayed in the movie War Games. Another example is that during the develop-
ment of Multics, penetration tests were conducted by an Air Force "tiger team"
(simulating adversaries). One tactic employed was to send a bogus operating system
update to a site running Multics. The update contained a Trojan horse (described
later) that could be activated by a backdoor and that allowed the tiger team to gain
access. The threat was so well implemented that the Multics developers could not
find it, even after they were informed of its presence [ENGE80].
It is difficult to implement operating system controls for backdoors. Security
measures must focus on the program development and software update activities.
Logic Bomb
One of the oldest types of program threat, predating viruses and worms, is the logic
bomb. The logic bomb is code embedded in some legitimate program that is set to
"explode" when certain conditions are met. Examples of conditions that can be used
as triggers for a logic bomb are the presence or absence of certain files, a particular
day of the week or date, or a particular user running the application. Once triggered,
a bomb may alter or delete data or entire files, cause a machine halt, or do some
other damage. A striking example of how logic bombs can be employed was the
case of Tim Lloyd, who was convicted of setting a logic bomb that cost his employer,
Omega Engineering, more than $10 million, derailed its corporate growth strategy,
and eventually led to the layoff of 80 workers [GAUD00]. Ultimately, Lloyd was
sentenced to 41 months in prison and ordered to pay $2 million in restitution.
Trojan Horse
A Trojan horse is a useful, or apparently useful, program or command procedure
containing hidden code that, when invoked, performs some unwanted or harmful
function.
Trojan horse programs can be used to accomplish functions indirectly that an
unauthorized user could not accomplish directly. For example, to gain access to the
files of another user on a shared system, a user could create a Trojan horse program
that, when executed, changes the invoking user's file permissions so that the files
are readable by any user. The author could then induce users to run the program by
placing it in a common directory and naming it such that it appears to be a useful
utility program or application. An example is a program that ostensibly produces
a listing of the user's files in a desirable format. After another user has run the
program, the author of the program can then access the information in the user's
files. An example of a Trojan horse program that would be difficult to detect is a
compiler that has been modified to insert additional code into certain programs as
they are compiled, such as a system login program [THOM84]. The code creates a
backdoor in the login program that permits the author to log on to the system using
a special password. This Trojan horse can never be discovered by reading the source
code of the login program.
Another common motivation for the Trojan horse is data destruction. The
program appears to be performing a useful function (e.g., a calculator program),
but it may also be quietly deleting the user's files. For example, a CBS executive
was victimized by a Trojan horse that destroyed all information contained in his

622  CHAPTER 14 / COMPUTER SECURITY THREATS
     computer's memory [TIME90]. The Trojan horse was implanted in a graphics rou-
     tine offered on an electronic bulletin board system.
        Trojan horses fit into one of three models:
       Continuing to perform the function of the original program and additionally
        performing a separate malicious activity
       Continuing to perform the function of the original program but modifying the
        function to perform malicious activity (e.g., a Trojan horse version of a login
        program that collects passwords) or to disguise other malicious activity (e.g., a
        Trojan horse version of a process listing program that does not display certain
        processes that are malicious)
       Performing a malicious function that completely replaces the function of the
        original program
     Mobile Code
     Mobile code refers to programs (e.g., script, macro, or other portable instruction)
     that can be shipped unchanged to a heterogeneous collection of platforms and exe-
     cute with identical semantics [JANS01]. The term also applies to situations involving
     a large homogeneous collection of platforms (e.g., Microsoft Windows).
        Mobile code is transmitted from a remote system to a local system and then
     executed on the local system without the user's explicit instruction. Mobile code
     often acts as a mechanism for a virus, worm, or Trojan horse to be transmitted
     to the user's workstation. In other cases, mobile code takes advantage of vulner-
     abilities to perform its own exploits, such as unauthorized data access or root
     compromise. Popular vehicles for mobile code include Java applets, ActiveX,
     JavaScript, and VBScript. The most common ways of using mobile code for
     malicious operations on local system are cross-site scripting, interactive and
     dynamic Web sites, e-mail attachments, and downloads from untrusted sites or
     of untrusted software.
     Multiple-Threat Malware
     Viruses and other malware may operate in multiple ways. The terminology is far
     from uniform; this subsection gives a brief introduction to several related concepts
     that could be considered multiple-threat malware.
        A multipartite virus infects in multiple ways. Typically, the multipartite virus
     is capable of infecting multiple types of files, so that virus eradication must deal with
     all of the possible sites of infection.
        A blended attack uses multiple methods of infection or transmission, to maxi-
     mize the speed of contagion and the severity of the attack. Some writers characterize
     a blended attack as a package that includes multiple types of malware. An example
     of a blended attack is the Nimda attack, erroneously referred to as simply a worm.
     Nimda uses four distribution methods:
       E-mail: A user on a vulnerable host opens an infected e-mail attachment;
        Nimda looks for e-mail addresses on the host and then sends copies of itself to
        those addresses.

                                          14.5 / VIRUSES, WORMS, AND BOTS                   623
        Windows shares: Nimda scans hosts for unsecured Windows file shares; it can
         then use NetBIOS86 as a transport mechanism to infect files on that host in
         the hopes that a user will run an infected file, which will activate Nimda on
         that host.
        Web servers: Nimda scans Web servers, looking for known vulnerabilities in
         Microsoft IIS. If it finds a vulnerable server, it attempts to transfer a copy of
         itself to the server and infect it and its files.
        Web clients: If a vulnerable Web client visits a Web server that has been
         infected by Nimda, the client's workstation will become infected.
         Thus, Nimda has worm, virus, and mobile code characteristics. Blended attacks
      may also spread through other services, such as instant messaging and peer-to-peer
      file sharing.
14.5  VIRUSES,WORMS, AND BOTS
      Viruses
      A computer virus is a piece of software that can "infect" other programs by modify-
      ing them; the modification includes injecting the original program with a routine to
      make copies of the virus program, which can then go on to infect other programs.
         Biological viruses are tiny scraps of genetic code--DNA or RNA--that can
      take over the machinery of a living cell and trick it into making thousands of flaw-
      less replicas of the original virus. Like its biological counterpart, a computer virus
      carries in its instructional code the recipe for making perfect copies of itself. The
      typical virus becomes embedded in a program on a computer. Then, whenever the
      infected computer comes into contact with an uninfected piece of software, a fresh
      copy of the virus passes into the new program. Thus, the infection can be spread
      from computer to computer by unsuspecting users who either swap disks or send
      programs to one another over a network. In a network environment, the ability
      to access applications and system services on other computers provides a perfect
      culture for the spread of a virus.
      THE NATURE OF VIRUSES  A virus can do anything that other programs do. The
      only difference is that it attaches itself to another program and executes secretly
      when the host program is run. Once a virus is executing, it can perform any function
      that is allowed by the privileges of the current user, such as erasing files and
      programs.
         A computer virus has three parts [AYCO06]:
        Infection mechanism: The means by which a virus spreads, enabling it to rep-
         licate. The mechanism is also referred to as the infection vector.
        Trigger: The event or condition that determines when the payload is activated
         or delivered.
        Payload: What the virus does, besides spreading. The payload may involve
         damage or may involve benign but noticeable activity.
