Viruses, Worms, and Bots
        Windows shares: Nimda scans hosts for unsecured Windows file shares; it can
         then use NetBIOS86 as a transport mechanism to infect files on that host in
         the hopes that a user will run an infected file, which will activate Nimda on
         that host.
        Web servers: Nimda scans Web servers, looking for known vulnerabilities in
         Microsoft IIS. If it finds a vulnerable server, it attempts to transfer a copy of
         itself to the server and infect it and its files.
        Web clients: If a vulnerable Web client visits a Web server that has been
         infected by Nimda, the client's workstation will become infected.
         Thus, Nimda has worm, virus, and mobile code characteristics. Blended attacks
      may also spread through other services, such as instant messaging and peer-to-peer
      file sharing.
14.5  VIRUSES,WORMS, AND BOTS
      Viruses
      A computer virus is a piece of software that can "infect" other programs by modify-
      ing them; the modification includes injecting the original program with a routine to
      make copies of the virus program, which can then go on to infect other programs.
         Biological viruses are tiny scraps of genetic code--DNA or RNA--that can
      take over the machinery of a living cell and trick it into making thousands of flaw-
      less replicas of the original virus. Like its biological counterpart, a computer virus
      carries in its instructional code the recipe for making perfect copies of itself. The
      typical virus becomes embedded in a program on a computer. Then, whenever the
      infected computer comes into contact with an uninfected piece of software, a fresh
      copy of the virus passes into the new program. Thus, the infection can be spread
      from computer to computer by unsuspecting users who either swap disks or send
      programs to one another over a network. In a network environment, the ability
      to access applications and system services on other computers provides a perfect
      culture for the spread of a virus.
      THE NATURE OF VIRUSES  A virus can do anything that other programs do. The
      only difference is that it attaches itself to another program and executes secretly
      when the host program is run. Once a virus is executing, it can perform any function
      that is allowed by the privileges of the current user, such as erasing files and
      programs.
         A computer virus has three parts [AYCO06]:
        Infection mechanism: The means by which a virus spreads, enabling it to rep-
         licate. The mechanism is also referred to as the infection vector.
        Trigger: The event or condition that determines when the payload is activated
         or delivered.
        Payload: What the virus does, besides spreading. The payload may involve
         damage or may involve benign but noticeable activity.

        During its lifetime, a typical virus goes through the following four phases:
       Dormant phase: The virus is idle. The virus will eventually be activated by
        some event, such as a date, the presence of another program or file, or the
        capacity of the disk exceeding some limit. Not all viruses have this stage.
       Propagation phase: The virus places an identical copy of itself into other pro-
        grams or into certain system areas on the disk. Each infected program will
        now contain a clone of the virus, which will itself enter a propagation phase.
       Triggering phase: The virus is activated to perform the function for which it
        was intended. As with the dormant phase, the triggering phase can be caused
        by a variety of system events, including a count of the number of times that
        this copy of the virus has made copies of itself.
       Execution phase: The function is performed. The function may be harm-
        less, such as a message on the screen, or damaging, such as the destruction of
        programs and data files.
        Most viruses carry out their work in a manner that is specific to a particular
     operating system and, in some cases, specific to a particular hardware platform. Thus,
     they are designed to take advantage of the details and weaknesses of particular
     systems.
     VIRUS  STRUCTURE  A virus can be prepended or postpended to an executable
     program, or it can be embedded in some other fashion. The key to its operation is
     that the infected program, when invoked, will first execute the virus code and then
     execute the original code of the program.
        A very general depiction of virus structure is shown in Figure 14.3 (based on
     [COHE94]). In this case, the virus code, V, is prepended to infected programs, and
     it is assumed that the entry point to the program, when invoked, is the first line of
     the program.
        The infected program begins with the virus code and works as follows. The
     first line of code is a jump to the main virus program. The second line is a special
     marker that is used by the virus to determine whether or not a potential victim
     program has already been infected with this virus. When the program is invoked,
     control is immediately transferred to the main virus program. The virus program
     may first seek out uninfected executable files and infect them. Next, the virus may
     perform some action, usually detrimental to the system. This action could be per-
     formed every time the program is invoked, or it could be a logic bomb that triggers
     only under certain conditions. Finally, the virus transfers control to the original pro-
     gram. If the infection phase of the program is reasonably rapid, a user is unlikely
     to notice any difference between the execution of an infected and an uninfected
     program.
        A virus such as the one just described is easily detected because an infected
     version of a program is longer than the corresponding uninfected one. A way to
     thwart such a simple means of detecting a virus is to compress the executable file
     so that both the infected and uninfected versions are of identical length. Figure 14.4
     [COHE94] shows in general terms the logic required. The important lines in this
     virus are numbered. We assume that program P1 is infected with the virus CV. When

       program    V  :=
{goto   main;
        1234567;
       subroutine    infect-executable           :=
         {loop:
         file        :=  get-random-executable-file;
         if     (first-line-of-file          =   1234567)
                then     goto  loop
                else     prepend   V  to  file;      }
       subroutine    do-damage     :=
         {whatever       damage    is    to  be  done}
       subroutine    trigger-pulled          :=
         {return         true  if  some   condition     holds}
main:       main-program       :=
         {infect-executable;
         if     trigger-pulled        then   do-damage;
         goto        next;}
next:
}
Figure 14.3     A Simple Virus
this program is invoked, control passes to its virus, which performs the following
steps:
   1.   For each uninfected file P2 that is found, the virus first compresses that file to
        produce P'2, which is shorter than the original program by the size of the virus.
   2.   A copy of the virus is prepended to the compressed program.
program     CV  :=
{goto   main;
        01234567;
        subroutine       infect-executable       :=
                {loop:
                         file  :=    get-random-executable-file;
                if   (first-line-of-file         =   01234567)  then  goto  loop;
             (1)         compress     file;
             (2)         prepend   CV    to  file;
         }
main:        main-program      :=
                {if  ask-permission       then      infect-executable;
             (3)         uncompress      rest-of-file;
             (4)         run   uncompressed      file;}
         }
Figure 14.4     Logic for a Compression Virus

     3.  The compressed version of the original infected program, P'1, is uncompressed.
     4.  The uncompressed original program is executed.
         In this example, the virus does nothing other than propagate. As previously
     mentioned, the virus may include a logic bomb.
     INITIAL INFECTION  Once a virus has gained entry to a system by infecting a single
     program, it is in a position to potentially infect some or all other executable files
     on that system when the infected program executes. Thus, viral infection can be
     completely prevented by preventing the virus from gaining entry in the first place.
     Unfortunately, prevention is extraordinarily difficult because a virus can be part
     of any program outside a system. Thus, unless one is content to take an absolutely
     bare piece of iron and write all one's own system and application programs, one is
     vulnerable. Many forms of infection can also be blocked by denying normal users
     the right to modify programs on the system.
         The lack of access controls on early PCs is a key reason that traditional
     machine code based viruses spread rapidly on these systems. In contrast, while it
     is easy enough to write a machine code virus for UNIX systems, they were almost
     never seen in practice, because the existence of access controls on these systems
     prevented effective propagation of the virus. Traditional machine code based
     viruses are now less prevalent, because modern PC operating systems have more
     effective access controls. However, virus creators have found other avenues, such as
     macro and e-mail viruses, as discussed subsequently.
     VIRUSES CLASSIFICATION   There has been a continuous arms race between virus
     writers and writers of antivirus software since viruses first appeared. As effective
     countermeasures are developed for existing types of viruses, newer types are
     developed. There is no simple or universally agreed-upon classification scheme
     for viruses. In this section, we follow [AYCO06] and classify viruses along two
     orthogonal axes: the type of target the virus tries to infect, and the method the
     virus uses to conceal itself from detection by users and antivirus software.
         A virus classification by target includes the following categories:
        Boot sector infector: Infects a master boot record or boot record and spreads
         when a system is booted from the disk containing the virus
        File infector: Infects files that the operating system or shell considers to be
         executable
        Macro virus: Infects files with macro code that is interpreted by an application
         A virus classification by concealment strategy includes the following categories:
        Encrypted virus: A typical approach is as follows. A portion of the virus
         creates a random encryption key and encrypts the remainder of the virus.
         The key is stored with the virus. When an infected program is invoked, the
         virus uses the stored random key to decrypt the virus. When the virus rep-
         licates, a different random key is selected. Because the bulk of the virus is
         encrypted with a different key for each instance, there is no constant bit
         pattern to observe.

 Stealth virus: A form of virus explicitly designed to hide itself from detection
    by antivirus software. Thus, the entire virus, not just a payload is hidden.
 Polymorphic virus: A virus that mutates with every infection, making detec-
    tion by the "signature" of the virus impossible.
   Metamorphic virus: As with a polymorphic virus, a metamorphic virus mutates
    with every infection. The difference is that a metamorphic virus rewrites itself
    completely at each iteration, increasing the difficulty of detection. Metamorphic
    viruses may change their behavior as well as their appearance.
    One example of a stealth virus was discussed earlier: A virus that uses com-
pression so that the infected program is exactly the same length as an uninfected
version. Far more sophisticated techniques are possible. For example, a virus can
place intercept logic in disk I/O routines, so that when there is an attempt to read
suspected portions of the disk using these routines, the virus will present back the
original, uninfected program. Thus, stealth is not a term that applies to a virus as
such but, rather, refers to a technique used by a virus to evade detection.
    A polymorphic virus creates copies during replication that are functionally
equivalent but have distinctly different bit patterns. As with a stealth virus, the
purpose is to defeat programs that scan for viruses. In this case, the "signature" of
the virus will vary with each copy. To achieve this variation, the virus may randomly
insert superfluous instructions or interchange the order of independent instruc-
tions. A more effective approach is to use encryption. The strategy of the encryption
virus is followed. The portion of the virus that is responsible for generating keys and
performing encryption/decryption is referred to as the mutation engine. The muta-
tion engine itself is altered with each use.
VIRUS KITS  Another weapon in the virus writers' armory is the virus-creation
toolkit. Such a toolkit enables a relative novice to quickly create a number of
different viruses. Although viruses created with toolkits tend to be less sophisticated
than viruses designed from scratch, the sheer number of new viruses that can be
generated using a toolkit creates a problem for antivirus schemes.
MACRO VIRUSES  In the mid-1990s, macro viruses became by far the most prevalent
type of virus. Macro viruses are particularly threatening for a number of reasons:
1.  A macro virus is platform independent. Many macro viruses infect Microsoft
    Word documents or other Microsoft Office documents. Any hardware platform
    and operating system that supports these applications can be infected.
2.  Macro viruses infect documents, not executable portions of code. Most of the
    information introduced onto a computer system is in the form of a document
    rather than a program.
3.  Macro viruses are easily spread. A very common method is by electronic mail.
4.  Because macro viruses infect user documents rather than system programs, tra-
    ditional file system access controls are of limited use in preventing their spread.
    Macro viruses take advantage of a feature found in Word and other Office
applications such as Microsoft Excel--namely, the macro. In essence, a macro is an
executable program embedded in a word processing document or other type of file.

     Typically, users employ macros to automate repetitive tasks and thereby save key-
     strokes. The macro language is usually some form of the Basic programming language.
     A user might define a sequence of keystrokes in a macro and set it up so that the
     macro is invoked when a function key or special short combination of keys is input.
         Successive releases of MS Office products provide increased protection
     against macro viruses. For example, Microsoft offers an optional Macro Virus
     Protection tool that detects suspicious Word files and alerts the customer to the
     potential risk of opening a file with macros. Various antivirus product vendors
     have also developed tools to detect and correct macro viruses. As in other types of
     viruses, the arms race continues in the field of macro viruses, but they no longer are
     the predominant virus threat.
     E-MAIL VIRUSES  A more recent development in malicious software is the e-mail
     virus. The first rapidly spreading e-mail viruses, such as Melissa, made use of
     a Microsoft Word macro embedded in an attachment. If the recipient opens the
     e-mail attachment, the Word macro is activated. Then
     1.  The e-mail virus sends itself to everyone on the mailing list in the user's e-mail
         package.
     2.  The virus does local damage on the user's system.
         In 1999, a more powerful version of the e-mail virus appeared. This newer
     version can be activated merely by opening an e-mail that contains the virus rather
     than opening an attachment. The virus uses the Visual Basic scripting language
     supported by the e-mail package.
         Thus we see a new generation of malware that arrives via e-mail and uses
     e-mail software features to replicate itself across the Internet. The virus propa-
     gates itself as soon as it is activated (either by opening an e-mail attachment or by
     opening the e-mail) to all of the e-mail addresses known to the infected host. As a
     result, whereas viruses used to take months or years to propagate, they now do so
     in hours. This makes it very difficult for antivirus software to respond before much
     damage is done. Ultimately, a greater degree of security must be built into Internet
     utility and application software on PCs to counter the growing threat.
     Worms
     A worm is a program that can replicate itself and send copies from computer to
     computer across network connections. Upon arrival, the worm may be activated to
     replicate and propagate again. In addition to propagation, the worm usually performs
     some unwanted function. An e-mail virus has some of the characteristics of a worm
     because it propagates itself from system to system. However, we can still classify it as a
     virus because it uses a document modified to contain viral macro content and requires
     human action. A worm actively seeks out more machines to infect, and each machine
     that is infected serves as an automated launching pad for attacks on other machines.
         Network worm programs use network connections to spread from system to
     system. Once active within a system, a network worm can behave as a computer
     virus or bacteria, or it could implant Trojan horse programs or perform any number
     of disruptive or destructive actions.

    To replicate itself, a network worm uses some sort of network vehicle.
Examples include the following:
   Electronic mail facility: A worm mails a copy of itself to other systems, so that
    its code is run when the e-mail or an attachment is received or viewed.
   Remote execution capability: A worm executes a copy of itself on another
    system, either using an explicit remote execution facility or by exploiting a
    program flaw in a network service to subvert its operations (such as buffer
    overflow, described in Chapter 7).
   Remote login capability: A worm logs on to a remote system as a user and
    then uses commands to copy itself from one system to the other, where it then
    executes.
The new copy of the worm program is then run on the remote system where, in
addition to any functions that it performs at that system, it continues to spread in
the same fashion.
    A network worm exhibits the same characteristics as a computer virus: a
dormant phase, a propagation phase, a triggering phase, and an execution phase.
The propagation phase generally performs the following functions:
1.  Search for other systems to infect by examining host tables or similar reposi-
    tories of remote system addresses.
2.  Establish a connection with a remote system.
3.  Copy itself to the remote system and cause the copy to be run.
    The network worm may also attempt to determine whether a system has pre-
viously been infected before copying itself to the system. In a multiprogramming
system, it may also disguise its presence by naming itself as a system process or using
some other name that may not be noticed by a system operator.
    As with viruses, network worms are difficult to counter.
WORM PROPAGATION MODEL           [ZOU05] describes a model for worm propagation
based on an analysis of recent worm attacks. The speed of propagation and the
total number of hosts infected depend on a number of factors, including the mode
of propagation, the vulnerability or vulnerabilities exploited, and the degree of
similarity to preceding attacks. For the latter factor, an attack that is a variation of a
recent previous attack may be countered more effectively than a more novel attack.
Figure 14.5 shows the dynamics for one typical set of parameters. Propagation proceeds
through three phases. In the initial phase, the number of hosts increases exponentially.
To see that this is so, consider a simplified case in which a worm is launched from a
single host and infects two nearby hosts. Each of these hosts infects two more hosts,
and so on. This results in exponential growth. After a time, infecting hosts waste some
time attacking already infected hosts, which reduces the rate of infection. During this
middle phase, growth is approximately linear, but the rate of infection is rapid. When
most vulnerable computers have been infected, the attack enters a slow finish phase
as the worm seeks out those remaining hosts that are difficult to identify.
    Clearly, the objective in countering a worm is to catch the worm in its slow
start phase, at a time when few hosts have been infected.

                                        5    105
                                        4.5
                                                                                            Slow finish
                                        4                                                         phase
              Number of infected hosts  3.5
                                        3
                                        2.5
                                                                                     Fast spread
                                        2                                            phase
                                        1.5       Slow start
                                        1         phase
                                        0.5
                                                  100         200  300               400          500    600
                                                                   Time t (minutes)
              Figure 14.5                         Worm Propagation Model
     STATE OF WORM TECHNOLOGY                                 The state of the art in worm technology includes
     the following:
       Multiplatform: Newer worms are not limited to Windows machines but can
        attack a variety of platforms, especially the popular varieties of UNIX.
       Multiexploit: New worms penetrate systems in a variety of ways, using exploits
        against Web servers, browsers, e-mail, file sharing, and other network-based
        applications.
       Ultrafast spreading: One technique to accelerate the spread of a worm is to
        conduct a prior Internet scan to accumulate Internet addresses of vulnerable
        machines.
       Polymorphic: To evade detection, skip past filters, and foil real-time analysis,
        worms adopt the virus polymorphic technique. Each copy of the worm has
        new code generated on the fly using functionally equivalent instructions and
        encryption techniques.
       Metamorphic: In addition to changing their appearance, metamorphic worms
        have a repertoire of behavior patterns that are unleashed at different stages of
        propagation.
       Transport vehicles: Because worms can rapidly compromise a large number
        of systems, they are ideal for spreading other distributed attack tools, such as
        distributed denial of service bots.
       Zero-day exploit: To achieve maximum surprise and distribution, a worm
        should exploit an unknown vulnerability that is only discovered by the general
        network community when the worm is launched.

Bots
A bot (robot), also known as a zombie or drone, is a program that secretly takes
over another Internet-attached computer and then uses that computer to launch
attacks that are difficult to trace to the bot's creator. The bot is typically planted on
hundreds or thousands of computers belonging to unsuspecting third parties. The
collection of bots often is capable of acting in a coordinated manner; such a collec-
tion is referred to as a botnet.
      A botnet exhibits three characteristics: the bot functionality, a remote control
facility, and a spreading mechanism to propagate the bots and construct the botnet.
We examine each of these characteristics in turn.
USES OF BOTS  [HONE05] lists the following uses of bots:
 Distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks: A DDoS attack is an attack on
      a computer system or network that causes a loss of service to users.
     Spamming: With the help of a botnet and thousands of bots, an attacker is able
      to send massive amounts of bulk e-mail (spam).
     Sniffing traffic: Bots can also use a packet sniffer to watch for interesting clear-
      text data passing by a compromised machine. The sniffers are mostly used to
      retrieve sensitive information like usernames and passwords.
     Keylogging: If the compromised machine uses encrypted communication
      channels (e.g., HTTPS or POP3S), then just sniffing the network packets on
      the victim's computer is useless because the appropriate key to decrypt the
      packets is missing. But by using a keylogger, which captures keystrokes on the
      infected machine, an attacker can retrieve sensitive information. An imple-
      mented filtering mechanism (e.g., "I am only interested in key sequences near
      the keyword `paypal.com' ") further helps in stealing secret data.
     Spreading new malware: Botnets are used to spread new bots. This is very
      easy since all bots implement mechanisms to download and execute a file via
      HTTP or FTP. A botnet with 10,000 hosts that acts as the start base for a
      worm or mail virus allows very fast spreading and thus causes more harm.
     Installing advertisement add-ons and browser helper objects (BHOs): Botnets
      can also be used to gain financial advantages. This works by setting up a fake
      Web site with some advertisements: The operator of this Web site negotiates a
      deal with some hosting companies that pay for clicks on ads. With the help of
      a botnet, these clicks can be "automated" so that instantly a few thousand bots
      click on the pop-ups. This process can be further enhanced if the bot hijacks
      the start page of a compromised machine so that the "clicks" are executed
      each time the victim uses the browser.
     Attacking IRC chat networks: Botnets are also used for attacks against
      Internet Relay Chat (IRC) networks. Popular among attackers is especially
      the so-called clone attack: In this kind of attack, the controller orders each bot
      to connect a large number of clones to the victim IRC network. The victim is
      flooded by service requests from thousands of bots or thousands of channel-
      joins by these cloned bots. In this way, the victim IRC network is brought
      down, similar to a DDoS attack.

        Manipulating online polls/games: Online polls/games are getting more and
         more attention, and it is rather easy to manipulate them with botnets. Since
         every bot has a distinct IP address, every vote will have the same credibil-
         ity as a vote cast by a real person. Online games can be manipulated in a
         similar way.
     REMOTE CONTROL FACILITY  The remote control facility is what distinguishes a
     bot from a worm. A worm propagates itself and activates itself, whereas a bot is
     controlled from some central facility, at least initially.
         A typical means of implementing the remote control facility is on an IRC
     server. All bots join a specific channel on this server and treat incoming messages
     as commands. More recent botnets tend to avoid IRC mechanisms and use covert
     communication channels via protocols such as HTTP. Distributed control mecha-
     nisms are also used, to avoid a single point of failure.
         Once a communications path is established between a control module and the
     bots, the control module can activate the bots. In its simplest form, the control mod-
     ule simply issues command to the bot that causes the bot to execute routines that
     are already implemented in the bot. For greater flexibility, the control module can
     issue update commands that instruct the bots to download a file from some Internet
     location and execute it. The bot in this latter case becomes a more general-purpose
     tool that can be used for multiple attacks.
     CONSTRUCTING THE ATTACK NETWORK              The first step in a botnet attack is for the
     attacker to infect a number of machines with bot software that will ultimately be
     used to carry out the attack. The essential ingredients in this phase of the attack are
     the following:
     1.  Software that can carry out the attack. The software must be able to run on
         a large number of machines, must be able to conceal its existence, must be
         able to communicate with the attacker or have some sort of time-triggered
         mechanism, and must be able to launch the intended attack toward the
         target.
     2.  A vulnerability in a large number of systems. The attacker must become aware
         of a vulnerability that many system administrators and individual users have
         failed to patch and that enables the attacker to install the bot software.
     3.  A strategy for locating and identifying vulnerable machines, a process known
         as scanning or fingerprinting.
         In the scanning process, the attacker first seeks out a number of vulnerable
     machines and infects them. Then, typically, the bot software that is installed in
     the infected machines repeats the same scanning process, until a large distributed
     network of infected machines is created. [MIRK04] lists the following types of
     scanning strategies:
        Random: Each compromised host probes random addresses in the IP address
         space, using a different seed. This technique produces a high volume of
         Internet traffic, which may cause generalized disruption even before the actual
         attack is launched.

        Hit list: The attacker first compiles a long list of potential vulnerable machines.
         This can be a slow process done over a long period to avoid detection that an
         attack is underway. Once the list is compiled, the attacker begins infecting
         machines on the list. Each infected machine is provided with a portion of the
         list to scan. This strategy results in a very short scanning period, which may
         make it difficult to detect that infection is taking place.
        Topological: This method uses information contained on an infected victim
         machine to find more hosts to scan.
        Local subnet: If a host can be infected behind a firewall, that host then looks
         for targets in its own local network. The host uses the subnet address structure
         to find other hosts that would otherwise be protected by the firewall.
14.6  ROOTKITS
      A rootkit is a set of programs installed on a system to maintain administrator (or
      root) access to that system. Root access provides access to all the functions and
      services of the operating system. The rootkit alters the host's standard functionality
      in a malicious and stealthy way. With root access, an attacker has complete control
      of the system and can add or change programs and files, monitor processes, send
      and receive network traffic, and get backdoor access on demand.
         A rootkit can make many changes to a system to hide its existence, mak-
      ing it difficult for the user to determine that the rootkit is present and to iden-
      tify what changes have been made. In essence, a rootkit hides by subverting the
      mechanisms that monitor and report on the processes, files, and registries on a
      computer.
         Rootkits can be classified based on whether they can survive a reboot and
      execution mode. A rootkit may be
        Persistent: Activates each time the system boots. The rootkit must store code
         in a persistent store, such as the registry or file system, and configure a method
         by which the code executes without user intervention.
        Memory based: Has no persistent code and therefore cannot survive a reboot
        User mode: Intercepts calls to APIs (Application Program Interfaces) and mod-
         ifies returned results. For example, when an application performs a directory
         listing, the return results don't include entries identifying the files associated
         with the rootkit.
        Kernel mode: Can intercept calls to native APIs in kernel mode. The root-
         kit can also hide the presence of a malware process by removing it from the
         kernel's list of active processes.
      Rootkit Installation
      Unlike worms or bots, rootkits do not directly rely on vulnerabilities or exploits
      to get on a computer. One method of rootkit installation is via a Trojan horse pro-
      gram. The user is induced to load the Trojan horse, which then installs the rootkit.
