Computer Security Techniques
                                 CHAPTER
COMPUTER SECURITY
TECHNIQUES
15.1  Authentication
      Password-Based Authentication
      Token-Based Authentication
      Biometric Authentication
15.2  Access Control
      Discretionary Access Control
      Role-Based Access Control
15.3  Intrusion Detection
      Basic Principles
      Host-Based Intrusion Detection Techniques
      Audit Records
15.4  Malware Defense
      Antivirus Approaches
      Worm Countermeasures
      Bot Countermeasures
      Rootkit Countermeasures
15.5  Dealing with Buffer Overflow Attacks
      Compile-Time Defenses
      Run-Time Defenses
15.6  Windows 7 Security
      Access Control Scheme
      Access Token
      Security Descriptors
15.7  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
15.8  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                 639

640  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
         To guard against the baneful influence exerted by strangers is therefore
         an elementary dictate of savage prudence. Hence before strangers are
         allowed to enter a district, or at least before they are permitted to mingle
         freely with the inhabitants, certain ceremonies are often performed by
         the natives of the country for the purpose of disarming the strangers
         of their magical powers, or of disinfecting, so to speak, the tainted
         atmosphere by which they are supposed to be surrounded.
                                     --THE GOLDEN BOUGH, Sir James George Frazer
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
           Define and compare three methods of user authentication.
           Compare and contrast two methods of access control.
           Explain the basic principles and techniques of intrusion detection.
           Explain the basic principles and techniques of malware defense.
           Understand how to defend against buffer overflow attacks.
           Explain the file system used in Windows 7.
      This chapter introduces common measures used to counter the security threats
      discussed in Chapter 14.
15.1  AUTHENTICATION
      User authentication was introduced in Section 3.6. Note that user authentication is
      distinct from message authentication. Message authentication is a procedure that
      allows communicating parties to verify that the contents of a received message have
      not been altered and that the source is authentic. This chapter is concerned solely
      with user authentication.
      Password-Based Authentication
      A widely used line of defense against intruders is the password system. Virtually all
      multiuser systems, network-based servers, Web-based e-commerce sites, and other
      similar services require that a user provide not only a name or identifier (ID) but
      also a password. The system compares the password to a previously stored pass-
      word for that user ID, maintained in a system password file. The password serves
      to authenticate the ID of the individual logging on to the system. In turn, the ID
      provides security in the following ways:
           The ID determines whether the user is authorized to gain access to a system.
            In some systems, only those who already have an ID filed on the system are
            allowed to gain access.
