Authentication
640  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
         To guard against the baneful influence exerted by strangers is therefore
         an elementary dictate of savage prudence. Hence before strangers are
         allowed to enter a district, or at least before they are permitted to mingle
         freely with the inhabitants, certain ceremonies are often performed by
         the natives of the country for the purpose of disarming the strangers
         of their magical powers, or of disinfecting, so to speak, the tainted
         atmosphere by which they are supposed to be surrounded.
                                     --THE GOLDEN BOUGH, Sir James George Frazer
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
           Define and compare three methods of user authentication.
           Compare and contrast two methods of access control.
           Explain the basic principles and techniques of intrusion detection.
           Explain the basic principles and techniques of malware defense.
           Understand how to defend against buffer overflow attacks.
           Explain the file system used in Windows 7.
      This chapter introduces common measures used to counter the security threats
      discussed in Chapter 14.
15.1  AUTHENTICATION
      User authentication was introduced in Section 3.6. Note that user authentication is
      distinct from message authentication. Message authentication is a procedure that
      allows communicating parties to verify that the contents of a received message have
      not been altered and that the source is authentic. This chapter is concerned solely
      with user authentication.
      Password-Based Authentication
      A widely used line of defense against intruders is the password system. Virtually all
      multiuser systems, network-based servers, Web-based e-commerce sites, and other
      similar services require that a user provide not only a name or identifier (ID) but
      also a password. The system compares the password to a previously stored pass-
      word for that user ID, maintained in a system password file. The password serves
      to authenticate the ID of the individual logging on to the system. In turn, the ID
      provides security in the following ways:
           The ID determines whether the user is authorized to gain access to a system.
            In some systems, only those who already have an ID filed on the system are
            allowed to gain access.

                                                     15.1 / AUTHENTICATION             641
  The ID determines the privileges accorded to the user. A few users may have
   supervisory or "superuser" status that enables them to read files and perform
   functions that are especially protected by the operating system. Some systems
   have guest or anonymous accounts, and users of these accounts have more
   limited privileges than others.
  The ID is used in what is referred to as discretionary access control. For exam-
   ple, by listing the IDs of the other users, a user may grant permission to them
   to read files owned by that user.
THE USE OF HASHED PASSWORDS           A widely used password security technique is
the use of hashed passwords and a salt value. This scheme is found on virtually all
UNIX variants as well as on a number of other operating systems. The following
procedure is employed (Figure 15.1a). To load a new password into the system,
the user selects or is assigned a password. This password is combined with a fixed-
length salt value [MORR79]. In older implementations, this value is related to the
time at which the password is assigned to the user. Newer implementations use a
pseudorandom or random number. The password and salt serve as inputs to a hashing
algorithm to produce a fixed-length hash code. The hash algorithm is designed to
be slow to execute to thwart attacks. The hashed password is then stored, together
with a plaintext copy of the salt, in the password file for the corresponding user
ID. The hashed-password method has been shown to be secure against a variety of
cryptanalytic attacks [WAGN00].
   When a user attempts to log on to a UNIX system, the user provides an ID
and a password (Figure 15.1b). The operating system uses the ID to index into the
password file and retrieve the plaintext salt and the encrypted password. The salt
and user-supplied password are used as input to the encryption routine. If the result
matches the stored value, the password is accepted.
   The salt serves three purposes:
  It prevents duplicate passwords from being visible in the password file. Even
   if two users choose the same password, those passwords will be assigned
   different salt values. Hence, the hashed passwords of the two users will
   differ.
  It greatly increases the difficulty of offline dictionary attacks. For a salt of
   length b bits, the number of possible passwords is increased by a factor of 2b,
   increasing the difficulty of guessing a password in a dictionary attack.
  It becomes nearly impossible to find out whether a person with passwords on
   two or more systems has used the same password on all of them.
   To see the second point, consider the way that an offline dictionary attack
would work. The attacker obtains a copy of the password file. Suppose first that the
salt is not used. The attacker's goal is to guess a single password. To that end, the
attacker submits a large number of likely passwords to the hashing function. If any
of the guesses matches one of the hashes in the file, then the attacker has found a
password that is in the file. But faced with the UNIX scheme, the attacker must take
each guess and submit it to the hash function once for each salt value in the diction-
ary file, multiplying the number of guesses that must be checked.

642  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
                               Password                    Password file
           Salt                                           User ID   Salt   Hash code
                    Slow hash                  Load
                    function
                               (a) Loading a new password
                               Password file
           User ID             User ID   Salt  Hash code
                                                                    Salt
                    Select                                                                Password
                                                                           Slow hash
                                                                           function
                                                          Hashed password  Compare
                               (b) Verifying a password
     Figure 15.1            UNIX Password Scheme
     There are two threats to the UNIX password scheme. First, a user can gain
     access on a machine using a guest account or by some other means and then run a
     password guessing program, called a password cracker, on that machine. The attacker
     should be able to check many thousands of possible passwords with little resource
     consumption. Second, if an opponent is able to obtain a copy of the password file,
     then a cracker program can be run on another machine at leisure. This enables the
     opponent to run through millions of possible passwords in a reasonable period.
     UNIX  IMPLEMENTATIONS               Since       the  original  development       of  UNIX,     most
     implementations have relied on the following password scheme. Each user selects a

                                                             15.1 / AUTHENTICATION       643
password of up to eight printable characters in length. This is converted into a 56-bit
value (using 7-bit ASCII) that serves as the key input to an encryption routine. The
hash routine, known as crypt(3), is based on DES. A 12-bit salt value is used. The
modified DES algorithm is executed with a data input consisting of a 64-bit block
of zeros. The output of the algorithm then serves as input for a second encryption.
This process is repeated for a total of 25 encryptions. The resulting 64-bit output
is then translated into an 11-character sequence. The modification of the DES
algorithm converts it into a one-way hash function. The crypt(3) routine is designed
to discourage guessing attacks. Software implementations of DES are slow compared
to hardware versions, and the use of 25 iterations multiplies the time required by 25.
This particular implementation is now considered woefully inadequate. For
example, [PERR03] reports the results of a dictionary attack using a supercom-
puter. The attack was able to process over 50 million password guesses in about
80 minutes. Further, the results showed that for about $10,000 anyone should be
able to do the same in a few months using one uniprocessor machine. Despite its
known weaknesses, this UNIX scheme is still often required for compatibility with
existing account management software or in multivendor environments.
There are other, much stronger, hash/salt schemes available for UNIX. The
recommended hash function for many UNIX systems, including Linux, Solaris, and
FreeBSD, is based on the MD5 secure hash algorithm (which is similar to, but not
as secure as, SHA-1).1 The MD5 crypt routine uses a salt of up to 48 bits and effec-
tively has no limitations on password length. It produces a 128-bit hash value. It is
also far slower than crypt(3). To achieve the slowdown, MD5 crypt uses an inner
loop with 1,000 iterations.
Probably the most secure version of the UNIX hash/salt scheme was devel-
oped for OpenBSD, another widely used open source UNIX. This scheme, reported
in [PROV99], uses a hash function based on the Blowfish symmetric block cipher.
The hash function, called Bcrypt, is quite slow to execute. Bcrypt allows passwords
of up to 55 characters in length and requires a random salt value of 128 bits, to
produce a 192-bit hash value. Bcrypt also includes a cost variable; an increase in
the cost variable causes a corresponding increase in the time required to perform a
Bcyrpt hash. The cost assigned to a new password is configurable, so that adminis-
trators can assign a higher cost to privileged users.
Token-Based Authentication
Objects that a user possesses for the purpose of user authentication are called
tokens. In this subsection, we examine two types of tokens that are widely used;
these are cards that have the appearance and size of bank cards.
MEMORY CARDS  Memory cards can store but not process data. The most common
such card is the bank card with a magnetic stripe on the back. A magnetic stripe
can store only a simple security code, which can be read (and unfortunately
reprogrammed) by an inexpensive card reader. There are also memory cards that
include an internal electronic memory.
1See Appendix K for a discussion of secure hash algorithms.

644  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
        Memory cards can be used alone for physical access, such as a hotel room. For
     computer user authentication, such cards are typically used with some form of pass-
     word or personal identification number (PIN). A typical application is an automatic
     teller machine (ATM).
        The memory card, when combined with a PIN or password, provides signifi-
     cantly greater security than a password alone. An adversary must gain physical
     possession of the card (or be able to duplicate it) plus must gain knowledge of the
     PIN. Among the potential drawbacks are the following [NIST95]:
       Requires special reader: This increases the cost of using the token and creates
        the requirement to maintain the security of the reader's hardware and software.
       Token loss: A lost token temporarily prevents its owner from gaining system
        access. Thus, there is an administrative cost in replacing the lost token. In
        addition, if the token is found, stolen, or forged, then an adversary now need
        only determine the PIN to gain unauthorized access.
       User dissatisfaction: Although users may have no difficulty in accepting the
        use of a memory card for ATM access, its use for computer access may be
        deemed inconvenient.
     SMART CARDS  A wide variety of devices qualify as smart tokens. These can be
     categorized along three dimensions that are not mutually exclusive:
       Physical characteristics: Smart tokens include an embedded microprocessor.
        A smart token that looks like a bank card is called a smart card. Other smart
        tokens can look like calculators, keys, or other small portable objects.
       Interface: Manual interfaces include a keypad and display for human/token
        interaction. Smart tokens with an electronic interface communicate with a
        compatible reader/writer.
       Authentication protocol: The purpose of a smart token is to provide a means
        for user authentication. We can classify the authentication protocols used with
        smart tokens into three categories:
        -- Static: With a static protocol, the user authenticates himself or herself to the
        token and then the token authenticates the user to the computer. The latter
        half of this protocol is similar to the operation of a memory token.
        -- Dynamic password generator: In this case, the token generates a unique
        password periodically (e.g., every minute). This password is then entered
        into the computer system for authentication, either manually by the user or
        electronically via the token. The token and the computer system must be
        initialized and kept synchronized so that the computer knows the password
        that is current for this token.
        -- Challenge-response: In this case, the computer system generates a chal-
        lenge, such as a random string of numbers. The smart token generates a
        response based on the challenge. For example, public-key cryptography
        could be used and the token could encrypt the challenge string with the
        token's private key.

                                                   15.1 / AUTHENTICATION                645
   For user authentication to computer, the most important category of smart
token is the smart card, which has the appearance of a credit card, has an electronic
interface, and may use any of the type of protocols just described. The remainder of
this section discusses smart cards.
   A smart card contains within it an entire microprocessor, including processor,
memory, and I/O ports. Some versions incorporate a special coprocessing circuit for
cryptographic operation to speed the task of encoding and decoding messages or
generating digital signatures to validate the information transferred. In some cards,
the I/O ports are directly accessible by a compatible reader by means of exposed
electrical contacts. Other cards rely instead on an embedded antenna for wireless
communication with the reader.
Biometric Authentication
A biometric authentication system attempts to authenticate an individual based on
his or her unique physical characteristics. These include static characteristics, such
as fingerprints, hand geometry, facial characteristics, and retinal and iris patterns;
and dynamic characteristics, such as voiceprint and signature. In essence, biomet-
rics is based on pattern recognition. Compared to passwords and tokens, biometric
authentication is both technically complex and expensive. While it is used in a num-
ber of specific applications, biometrics has yet to mature as a standard tool for user
authentication to computer systems.
   A number of different types of physical characteristics are either in use or
under study for user authentication. The most common are the following:
  Facial characteristics: Facial characteristics are the most common means of
   human-to-human identification; thus it is natural to consider them for iden-
   tification by computer. The most common approach is to define characteris-
   tics based on relative location and shape of key facial features, such as eyes,
   eyebrows, nose, lips, and chin shape. An alternative approach is to use an
   infrared camera to produce a face thermogram that correlates with the under-
   lying vascular system in the human face.
  Fingerprints: Fingerprints have been used as a means of identification for
   centuries, and the process has been systematized and automated particu-
   larly for law enforcement purposes. A fingerprint is the pattern of ridges and
   furrows on the surface of the fingertip. Fingerprints are believed to be unique
   across the entire human population. In practice, automated fingerprint recog-
   nition and matching system extract a number of features from the fingerprint
   for storage as a numerical surrogate for the full fingerprint pattern.
  Hand geometry: Hand geometry systems identify features of the hand, includ-
   ing shape, and lengths and widths of fingers.
  Retinal pattern: The pattern formed by veins beneath the retinal surface is
   unique and therefore suitable for identification. A retinal biometric system
   obtains a digital image of the retinal pattern by projecting a low-intensity
   beam of visual or infrared light into the eye.
  Iris: Another unique physical characteristic is the detailed structure of the iris.

646  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
                             Hand                        Iris
                             Signature  Retina
         Cost
                             Face       Finger
                             Voice
                                        Accuracy
         Figure 15.2                Cost versus Accuracy of Various Biometric
         Characteristics in User Authentication Schemes
        Signature: Each individual has a unique style of handwriting, and this is
         reflected especially in the signature, which is typically a frequently written
         sequence. However, multiple signature samples from a single individual will
         not be identical. This complicates the task of developing a computer represen-
         tation of the signature that can be matched to future samples.
        Voice: Whereas the signature style of an individual reflects not only the unique
         physical attributes of the writer but also the writing habit that has developed,
         voice patterns are more closely tied to the physical and anatomical characteris-
         tics of the speaker. Nevertheless, there is still a variation from sample to sample
         over time from the same speaker, complicating the biometric recognition task.
         Figure 15.2 gives a rough indication of the relative cost and accuracy of these
      biometric measures. The concept of accuracy does not apply to user authentication
      schemes using smart cards or passwords. For example, if a user enters a password, it
      either matches exactly the password expected for that user or not. In the case of bio-
      metric parameters, the system instead must determine how closely a presented biomet-
      ric characteristic matches a stored characteristic. Before elaborating on the concept of
      biometric accuracy, we need to have a general idea of how biometric systems work.
15.2  ACCESS CONTROL
      An access control policy dictates what types of access are permitted, under what
      circumstances, and by whom. Access control policies are generally grouped into the
      following categories:
        Discretionary access control (DAC): Controls access based on the identity
         of the requestor and on access rules (authorizations) stating what requestors
         are (or are not) allowed to do. This policy is termed discretionary because an
         entity might have access rights that permit the entity, by its own volition, to
         enable another entity to access some resource.
        Mandatory access control (MAC): Controls access based on comparing secu-
         rity labels (which indicate how sensitive or critical system resources are) with
