Access Control
646  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
                             Hand                        Iris
                             Signature  Retina
         Cost
                             Face       Finger
                             Voice
                                        Accuracy
         Figure 15.2                Cost versus Accuracy of Various Biometric
         Characteristics in User Authentication Schemes
        Signature: Each individual has a unique style of handwriting, and this is
         reflected especially in the signature, which is typically a frequently written
         sequence. However, multiple signature samples from a single individual will
         not be identical. This complicates the task of developing a computer represen-
         tation of the signature that can be matched to future samples.
        Voice: Whereas the signature style of an individual reflects not only the unique
         physical attributes of the writer but also the writing habit that has developed,
         voice patterns are more closely tied to the physical and anatomical characteris-
         tics of the speaker. Nevertheless, there is still a variation from sample to sample
         over time from the same speaker, complicating the biometric recognition task.
         Figure 15.2 gives a rough indication of the relative cost and accuracy of these
      biometric measures. The concept of accuracy does not apply to user authentication
      schemes using smart cards or passwords. For example, if a user enters a password, it
      either matches exactly the password expected for that user or not. In the case of bio-
      metric parameters, the system instead must determine how closely a presented biomet-
      ric characteristic matches a stored characteristic. Before elaborating on the concept of
      biometric accuracy, we need to have a general idea of how biometric systems work.
15.2  ACCESS CONTROL
      An access control policy dictates what types of access are permitted, under what
      circumstances, and by whom. Access control policies are generally grouped into the
      following categories:
        Discretionary access control (DAC): Controls access based on the identity
         of the requestor and on access rules (authorizations) stating what requestors
         are (or are not) allowed to do. This policy is termed discretionary because an
         entity might have access rights that permit the entity, by its own volition, to
         enable another entity to access some resource.
        Mandatory access control (MAC): Controls access based on comparing secu-
         rity labels (which indicate how sensitive or critical system resources are) with

                                                        15.2 / ACCESS CONTROL             647
   security clearances (which indicate system entities are eligible to access cer-
   tain resources). This policy is termed mandatory because an entity that has
   clearance to access a resource may not, just by its own volition, enable another
   entity to access that resource.
  Role-based access control (RBAC): Controls access based on the roles that
   users have within the system and on rules stating what accesses are allowed to
   users in given roles.
   DAC is the traditional method of implementing access control. This method
was introduced in Chapter 12; we provide more detail in this section. MAC is a
concept that evolved out of requirements for military information security and is
beyond the scope of this book. RBAC has become increasingly popular and is intro-
duced later in this section.
   These three policies are not mutually exclusive (Figure 15.3). An access control
mechanism can employ two or even all three of these policies to cover different
classes of system resources.
Discretionary Access Control2
This section introduces a general model for DAC developed by Lampson, Graham,
and Denning [LAMP71, GRAH72, DENN71]. The model assumes a set of subjects,
a set of objects, and a set of rules that govern the access of subjects to objects. Let us
define the protection state of a system to be the set of information, at a given point in
time, that specifies the access rights for each subject with respect to each object. We can
identify three requirements: representing the protection state, enforcing access rights,
and allowing subjects to alter the protection state in certain ways. The model addresses
all three requirements, giving a general, logical description of a DAC system.
                  Discretionary                         Mandatory
                  access control                        access control
                              policy                    policy
                                      Role-based
                                      access control
                                      policy
                  Figure 15.3  Access Control Policies
2Before continuing, the reader should review Section 12.8 and the discussion of UNIX file access control
in Section 12.9.

648  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
                 To represent the protection state, we extend the universe of objects in the
          access control matrix to include the following:
                Processes: Access rights include the ability to delete a process, stop (block),
                 and wake up a process.
                Devices: Access rights include the ability to read/write the device, to control
                 its operation (e.g., a disk seek), and to block/unblock the device for use.
                Memory locations or regions: Access rights include the ability to read/write
                 certain locations of regions of memory that are protected so that the default is
                 that access is not allowed.
                Subjects: Access rights with respect to a subject have to do with the ability to grant
                 or delete access rights of that subject to other objects, as explained subsequently.
                 Figure 15.4 is an example (compare Figure 12.13a). For an access control
          matrix A, each entry A[S, X] contains strings, called access attributes, that specify
          the access rights of subject S to object X. For example, in Figure 15.4, S1 may read
          file F2, because read appears in A[S1, F1].
                 From a logical or functional point of view, a separate access control module
          is associated with each type of object (Figure 15.5). The module evaluates each
          request by a subject to access an object to determine if the access right exists. An
          access attempt triggers the following steps:
          1.     A subject S0 issues a request of type a for object X.
          2.     The request causes the system (the operating system or an access control
                 interface module of some sort) to generate a message of the form (S0, a, X) to
                 the controller for X.
          3.     The controller interrogates the access matrix A to determine if a is in A[S0, X].
                 If so, the access is allowed; if not, the access is denied and a protection violation
                 occurs. The violation should trigger a warning and an appropriate action.
                 Figure 15.5 suggests that every access by a subject to an object is mediated
          by the controller for that object, and that the controller's decision is based on the
                                                          Objects
                           Subjects                      Files         Processes       Disk drives
                 S1        S2           S3       F1             F2     P1         P2   D1     D2
             S1  control   owner        owner    read *         read   wakeup  wakeup  seek   owner
                                        control                 owner
Subjects     S2            control               write *  execute                      owner  seek *
             S3                         control                 write  stop
                                     *  copy flag set
Figure 15.4      Extended  Access Control Matrix

                                                                           15.2  /  ACCESS  CONTROL       649
                                            System intervention
    Subjects                Access control mechanisms                                       Objects
Si           read F         (Si, read, F )
                                                        Filesystem                          Files
                                                        Memory                              Segments
                                                        addressing                          & pages
                                                        hardware
Sj  wakeup P             (Sj, wakeup, P)                Process
                                                        manager                             Processes
                                                        Terminal                            Terminal
                                                        & device                            & devices
                                                        manager
                                                        Instruction
                                                        decoding                            Instructions
                                                        hardware
Sk  grant a to Sn, X     (Sk, grant, a, Sn, X)
Sm  delete b from Sp, Y  (Sm, delete, b, Sp, Y)         Access
                                                        matrix
                                                        monitor
                                                        Access
                                                 write  matrix       read
Figure 15.5  An Organization of the Access Control Function
    current contents of the matrix. In addition, certain subjects have the authority to
    make specific changes to the access matrix. A request to modify the access matrix is
    treated as an access to the matrix, with the individual entries in the matrix treated as
    objects. Such accesses are mediated by an access matrix controller, which controls
    updates to the matrix.
             The model also includes a set of rules that govern modifications to the access
    matrix, shown in Table 15.1. For this purpose, we introduce the access rights owner
    and control and the concept of a copy flag, explained in the subsequent paragraphs.
             The first three rules deal with transferring, granting, and deleting access rights.
    Suppose that the entry   exists in A[S0, X]. This means that S0 has access right                      to
    subject X and, because of the presence of the copy flag, can transfer this right, with

650  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
Table 15.1  Access Control System           Commands
Rule        Command (by S0)                       Authorization                  Operation
R1          transfer  e   a*  f  to  S,  X  ` *' in A[So, X]       store  e  a*  f  in  A[S,  X]
                          a                                                  a
R2          grant  e  a*  f  to  S,  X      `owner' in A[So, X]    store  e  a*  f  in  A[S,  X]
                      a                                                      a
R3          delete  from S, X               `control' in A[So, S]  delete  from A[S, X]
                                                  or
                                            `owner' in A[So, X]
R4          w  read S, X                    `control' in A[So, S]  copy A[S, X] into w
                                                  or
                                            `owner' in A[So, X]
R5          create object X                 None                   add column for X to A; store
                                                                   `owner' in A[So, X]
R6          destroy object X                `owner' in A[So, X]    delete column for X from A
R7          create subject S                None                   add row for S to A; execute
                                                                   create object S; store `control'
                                                                   in A[S, S]
R8          destroy subject S               `owner' in A[So, S]    delete row for S from A;
                                                                   execute destroy object S
      or without copy flag, to another subject. Rule R1 expresses this capability. A subject
      would transfer the access right without the copy flag if there were a concern that the
      new subject would maliciously transfer the right to another subject that should not
      have that access right. For example, S1 may place read or read* in any matrix entry in
      the F1 column. Rule R2 states that if S0 is designated as the owner of object X, then S0
      can grant an access right to that object for any other subject. Rule 2 states that S0 can
      add any access right to A[S, X] for any S, if S0 has owner access to X. Rule R3 permits
      S0 to delete any access right from any matrix entry in a row for which S0 controls the
      subject and for any matrix entry in a column for which S0 owns the object. Rule R4
      permits a subject to read that portion of the matrix that it owns or controls.
            The remaining rules in Table 15.1 govern the creation and deletion of subjects
      and objects. Rule R5 states that any subject can create a new object, which it owns,
      and can then grant and delete access to the object. Under rule R6, the owner of an
      object can destroy the object, resulting in the deletion of the corresponding column
      of the access matrix. Rule R7 enables any subject to create a new subject; the crea-
      tor owns the new subject and the new subject has control access to itself. Rule R8
      permits the owner of a subject to delete the row and column (if there are subject
      columns) of the access matrix designated by that subject.
            The set of rules in Table 15.1 is an example of the rule set that could be defined
      for an access control system. The following are examples of additional or alternative
      rules that could be included. A transfer-only right could be defined, which results in
      the transferred right being added to the target subject and deleted from the trans-
      ferring subject. The number of owners of an object or a subject could be limited to
      one by not allowing the copy flag to accompany the owner right.

                                                         15.2 / ACCESS CONTROL               651
The ability of one subject to create another subject and to have owner access
right to that subject can be used to define a hierarchy of subjects. For example, in
Figure 15.4, S1 owns S2 and S3, so that S2 and S3 are subordinate to S1. By the rules
of Table 15.1, S1 can grant and delete to S2 access rights that S1 already has. Thus, a
subject can create another subject with a subset of its own access rights. This might be
useful, for example, if a subject is invoking an application that is not fully trusted, and
does not want that application to be able to transfer access rights to other subjects.
Role-Based Access Control
Traditional DAC systems define the access rights of individual users and groups of
users. In contrast, RBAC is based on the roles that users assume in a system rather
than the user's identity. Typically, RBAC models define a role as a job function within
an organization. RBAC systems assign access rights to roles instead of individual users.
In turn, users are assigned to different roles, either statically or dynamically, according
to their responsibilities.
RBAC now enjoys widespread commercial use and remains an area of active
research. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has issued a
standard, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules (FIPS PUB 140-2, May 25,
2001), that requires support for access control and administration through roles.
The relationship of users to roles is many to many, as is the relationship of
roles to resources, or system objects (Figure 15.6). The set of users changes, in some
Users                       Roles                        Resources
                            Role 1
                            Role 2
                            Role 3
Figure 15.6                 Users, Roles, and Resources

652  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
            environments frequently, and the assignment of a user to one or more roles may
            also be dynamic. The set of roles in the system in most environments is likely to be
            static, with only occasional additions or deletions. Each role will have specific access
            rights to one or more resources. The set of resources and the specific access rights
            associated with a particular role are also likely to change infrequently.
                We can use the access matrix representation to depict the key elements of an
            RBAC system in simple terms, as shown in Figure 15.7. The upper matrix relates
            individual users to roles. Typically there are many more users than roles. Each
            matrix entry is either blank or marked, the latter indicating that this user is assigned
                                          R1       R2                  Rn
                                  U1
                                  U2
                                  U3
                                  U4
                                  U5
                                  U6
                                  Um
                                                        Objects
                  R1     R2           Rn       F1       F1       P1        P2      D1     D2
            R1  control  owner        owner    read *   read     wakeup    wakeup  seek   owner
                                      control           owner
            R2           control               write *  execute                    owner  seek *
     Roles
            Rn                        control           write    stop
     Figure 15.7      Access Control Matrix Representation of RBAC

                                               15.3 / INTRUSION DETECTION                     653
      to this role. Note that a single user may be assigned multiple roles (more than one
      mark in a row) and that multiple users may be assigned to a single role (more
      than one mark in a column). The lower matrix has the same structure as the DAC
      matrix, with roles as subjects. Typically, there are few roles and many objects, or
      resources. In this matrix the entries are the specific access rights enjoyed by the
      roles. Note that a role can be treated as an object, allowing the definition of role
      hierarchies.
          RBAC lends itself to an effective implementation of the principle of least
      privilege. That is, each role should contain the minimum set of access rights needed
      for that role. A user is assigned to a role that enables him or her to perform only
      what is required for that role. Multiple users assigned to the same role enjoy the
      same minimal set of access rights.
15.3  INTRUSION DETECTION
      Intrusion detection systems were introduced in Section 3.6.
      Basic Principles
      Authentication facilities, access control facilities, and firewalls all play a role in
      countering intrusions. Another line of defense is intrusion detection, and this has
      been the focus of much research in recent years. This interest is motivated by a
      number of considerations, including the following:
      1.  If an intrusion is detected quickly enough, the intruder can be identified and
          ejected from the system before any damage is done or any data are compro-
          mised. Even if the detection is not sufficiently timely to preempt the intruder,
          the sooner that the intrusion is detected, the less the amount of damage and
          the more quickly that recovery can be achieved.
      2.  An effective IDS can serve as a deterrent, thus acting to prevent intrusions.
      3.  Intrusion detection enables the collection of information about intrusion tech-
          niques that can be used to strengthen intrusion prevention measures.
          Intrusion detection is based on the assumption that the behavior of the intruder
      differs from that of a legitimate user in ways that can be quantified. Of course, we
      cannot expect that there will be a crisp, exact distinction between an attack by an
      intruder and the normal use of resources by an authorized user. Rather, we must
      expect that there will be some overlap.
          Figure 15.8 suggests, in abstract terms, the nature of the task confronting the
      designer of an IDS. Although the typical behavior of an intruder differs from the
      typical behavior of an authorized user, there is an overlap in these behaviors. Thus,
      a loose interpretation of intruder behavior, which will catch more intruders, will
      also lead to a number of false positives, or authorized users identified as intruders.
      On the other hand, an attempt to limit false positives by a tight interpretation of
      intruder behavior will lead to an increase in false negatives, or intruders not identi-
      fied as intruders. Thus, there is an element of compromise and art in the practice of
      intrusion detection.
