Intrusion Detection
                                               15.3 / INTRUSION DETECTION                     653
      to this role. Note that a single user may be assigned multiple roles (more than one
      mark in a row) and that multiple users may be assigned to a single role (more
      than one mark in a column). The lower matrix has the same structure as the DAC
      matrix, with roles as subjects. Typically, there are few roles and many objects, or
      resources. In this matrix the entries are the specific access rights enjoyed by the
      roles. Note that a role can be treated as an object, allowing the definition of role
      hierarchies.
          RBAC lends itself to an effective implementation of the principle of least
      privilege. That is, each role should contain the minimum set of access rights needed
      for that role. A user is assigned to a role that enables him or her to perform only
      what is required for that role. Multiple users assigned to the same role enjoy the
      same minimal set of access rights.
15.3  INTRUSION DETECTION
      Intrusion detection systems were introduced in Section 3.6.
      Basic Principles
      Authentication facilities, access control facilities, and firewalls all play a role in
      countering intrusions. Another line of defense is intrusion detection, and this has
      been the focus of much research in recent years. This interest is motivated by a
      number of considerations, including the following:
      1.  If an intrusion is detected quickly enough, the intruder can be identified and
          ejected from the system before any damage is done or any data are compro-
          mised. Even if the detection is not sufficiently timely to preempt the intruder,
          the sooner that the intrusion is detected, the less the amount of damage and
          the more quickly that recovery can be achieved.
      2.  An effective IDS can serve as a deterrent, thus acting to prevent intrusions.
      3.  Intrusion detection enables the collection of information about intrusion tech-
          niques that can be used to strengthen intrusion prevention measures.
          Intrusion detection is based on the assumption that the behavior of the intruder
      differs from that of a legitimate user in ways that can be quantified. Of course, we
      cannot expect that there will be a crisp, exact distinction between an attack by an
      intruder and the normal use of resources by an authorized user. Rather, we must
      expect that there will be some overlap.
          Figure 15.8 suggests, in abstract terms, the nature of the task confronting the
      designer of an IDS. Although the typical behavior of an intruder differs from the
      typical behavior of an authorized user, there is an overlap in these behaviors. Thus,
      a loose interpretation of intruder behavior, which will catch more intruders, will
      also lead to a number of false positives, or authorized users identified as intruders.
      On the other hand, an attempt to limit false positives by a tight interpretation of
      intruder behavior will lead to an increase in false negatives, or intruders not identi-
      fied as intruders. Thus, there is an element of compromise and art in the practice of
      intrusion detection.

654  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
     Probability
density function                             Profile of
                  Profile of    authorized user
             intruder behavior                    behavior
                                                                                Overlap in observed
                                                                                or expected behavior
                                Average behavior            Average behavior    Measurable behavior
                                of intruder                 of authorized user  parameter
Figure 15.8       Profiles of Behavior of Intruders and Authorized Users
                  In Anderson's study [ANDE80], it was postulated that one could, with reason-
     able confidence, distinguish between a masquerader and a legitimate user. Patterns
     of legitimate user behavior can be established by observing past history, and signifi-
     cant deviation from such patterns can be detected. Anderson suggests that the task
     of detecting a misfeasor (legitimate user performing in an unauthorized fashion) is
     more difficult, in that the distinction between abnormal and normal behavior may be
     small. Anderson concluded that such violations would be undetectable solely through
     the search for anomalous behavior. However, misfeasor behavior might nevertheless
     be detectable by intelligent definition of the class of conditions that suggest unau-
     thorized use. Finally, the detection of the clandestine user was felt to be beyond the
     scope of purely automated techniques. These observations, which were made in 1980,
     remain true today.
                  For the remainder of this section, we concentrate on host-based intrusion
     detection.
     Host-Based Intrusion Detection Techniques
     Host-based IDSs add a specialized layer of security software to vulnerable or sensi-
     tive systems; examples include database servers and administrative systems. The
     host-based IDS monitors activity on the system in a variety of ways to detect suspi-
     cious behavior. In some cases, an IDS can halt an attack before any damage is done,
     but its primary purpose is to detect intrusions, log suspicious events, and send alerts.

                                    15.3 / INTRUSION DETECTION                           655
    The primary benefit of a host-based IDS is that it can detect both external and
internal intrusions, something that is not possible either with network-based IDSs or
firewalls.
    Host-based IDSs follow one of two general approaches to intrusion detection:
1.  Anomaly detection: Involves the collection of data relating to the behavior
    of legitimate users over a period of time. Then statistical tests are applied to
    observed behavior to determine with a high level of confidence whether that
    behavior is not legitimate user behavior. The following are two approaches to
    statistical anomaly detection:
    a. Threshold detection: This approach involves defining thresholds, independ-
    ent of user, for the frequency of occurrence of various events.
    b. Profile based: A profile of the activity of each user is developed and used to
    detect changes in the behavior of individual accounts.
2.  Signature detection: Involves an attempt to define a set of rules or attack pat-
    terns that can be used to decide that a given behavior is that of an intruder.
    In essence, anomaly approaches attempt to define normal, or expected, behav-
ior, whereas signature-based approaches attempt to define proper behavior.
    In terms of the types of attackers listed earlier, anomaly detection is effective
against masqueraders, who are unlikely to mimic the behavior patterns of the accounts
they appropriate. On the other hand, such techniques may be unable to deal with mis-
feasors. For such attacks, signature-based approaches may be able to recognize events
and sequences that, in context, reveal penetration. In practice, a system may employ a
combination of both approaches to be effective against a broad range of attacks.
Audit Records
A fundamental tool for intrusion detection is the audit record. Some record of ongoing
activity by users must be maintained as input to an IDS. Basically, two plans are used:
   Native audit records: Virtually all multiuser operating systems include ac-
    counting software that collects information on user activity. The advantage
    of using this information is that no additional collection software is needed.
    The disadvantage is that the native audit records may not contain the needed
    information or may not contain it in a convenient form.
   Detection-specific audit records: A collection facility can be implemented that
    generates audit records containing only that information required by the IDS.
    One advantage of such an approach is that it could be made vendor independ-
    ent and ported to a variety of systems. The disadvantage is the extra overhead
    involved in having, in effect, two accounting packages running on a machine.
    A good example of detection-specific audit records is one developed by
Dorothy Denning [DENN87]. Each audit record contains the following fields:
   Subject: Initiators of actions. A subject is typically a terminal user but might
    also be a process acting on behalf of users or groups of users. All activity arises
    through commands issued by subjects. Subjects may be grouped into different
    access classes, and these classes may overlap.

656  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
        Action: Operation performed by the subject on or with an object; for example,
         login, read, perform I/O, and execute.
        Object: Receptors of actions. Examples include files, programs, messages,
         records, terminals, printers, and user- or program-created structures. When a
         subject is the recipient of an action, such as electronic mail, then that subject
         is considered an object. Objects may be grouped by type. Object granularity
         may vary by object type and by environment. For example, database actions
         may be audited for the database as a whole or at the record level.
        Exception-condition: Denotes which, if any, exception condition is raised on
         return.
        Resource-usage: A list of quantitative elements in which each element gives
         the amount used of some resource (e.g., number of lines printed or displayed,
         number of records read or written, processor time, I/O units used, session
         elapsed time).
        Time-stamp: Unique time-and-date stamp identifying when the action took
         place.
         Most user operations are made up of a number of elementary actions. For
     example, a file copy involves the execution of the user command, which includes
     doing access validation and setting up the copy, plus the read from one file, plus the
     write to another file. Consider the command
                     COPY GAME.EXE TO 6 Library7 GAME.EXE
     issued by Smith to copy an executable file GAME from the current directory to the
     <Library> directory. The following audit records may be generated:
     Smith  execute  <Library>COPY.EXE            0          CPU  00002      11058721678
     Smith  Read         <Smith>GAME.EXE          0          RECORDS  0      11058721679
     Smith  execute  <Library>COPY.EXE           write-viol  RECORDS  0      11058721680
     In this case, the copy is aborted because Smith does not have write permission to
     <Library>.
         The decomposition of a user operation into elementary actions has three
     advantages:
     1.  Because objects are the protectable entities in a system, the use of elemen-
         tary actions enables an audit of all behavior affecting an object. Thus, the
         system can detect attempted subversions of access controls (by noting an
         abnormality in the number of exception conditions returned) and can detect
         successful subversions (by noting an abnormality in the set of objects acces-
         sible to the subject).
     2.  Single-object, single-action audit records simplify the model and the imple-
         mentation.

                                                        15.4 / MALWARE DEFENSE                  657
      3.  Because of the simple, uniform structure of the detection-specific audit
          records, it may be relatively easy to obtain this information or at least part
          of it by a straightforward mapping from existing native audit records to the
          detection-specific audit records.
15.4  MALWARE DEFENSE
      Antivirus Approaches
      The ideal solution to the threat of viruses is prevention: Do not allow a virus to
      get into the system in the first place. This goal is, in general, impossible to achieve,
      although prevention can reduce the number of successful viral attacks. The next
      best approach is to be able to do the following:
         Detection: Once the infection has occurred, determine that it has occurred
          and locate the virus.
         Identification: Once detection has been achieved, identify the specific virus
          that has infected a program.
         Removal: Once the specific virus has been identified, remove all traces of
          the virus from the infected program and restore it to its original state.
          Remove the virus from all infected systems so that the disease cannot
          spread further.
      If detection succeeds but either identification or removal is not possible, then the
      alternative is to discard the infected program and reload a clean backup version.
          Advances in virus and antivirus technology go hand in hand. Early viruses
      were relatively simple code fragments and could be identified and purged with rela-
      tively simple antivirus software packages. As the virus arms race has evolved, both
      viruses and, necessarily, antivirus software have grown more complex and sophis-
      ticated. Increasingly sophisticated antivirus approaches and products continue to
      appear. In this subsection, we highlight two of the most important.
      GENERIC DECRYPTION         Generic decryption (GD) technology enables the antivirus
      program to easily detect even the most complex polymorphic viruses while
      maintaining fast scanning speeds [NACH97]. Recall that when a file containing a
      polymorphic virus is executed, the virus must decrypt itself to activate. In order
      to detect such a structure, executable files are run through a GD scanner, which
      contains the following elements:
         CPU emulator: A software-based virtual computer. Instructions in an execut-
          able file are interpreted by the emulator rather than executed on the under-
          lying processor. The emulator includes software versions of all registers and
          other processor hardware, so that the underlying processor is unaffected by
          programs interpreted on the emulator.
         Virus signature scanner: A module that scans the target code looking for
          known virus signatures.
       Emulation control module: Controls the execution of the target code.
