Malware Defense
      3.  Because of the simple, uniform structure of the detection-specific audit
          records, it may be relatively easy to obtain this information or at least part
          of it by a straightforward mapping from existing native audit records to the
          detection-specific audit records.
15.4  MALWARE DEFENSE
      Antivirus Approaches
      The ideal solution to the threat of viruses is prevention: Do not allow a virus to
      get into the system in the first place. This goal is, in general, impossible to achieve,
      although prevention can reduce the number of successful viral attacks. The next
      best approach is to be able to do the following:
         Detection: Once the infection has occurred, determine that it has occurred
          and locate the virus.
         Identification: Once detection has been achieved, identify the specific virus
          that has infected a program.
         Removal: Once the specific virus has been identified, remove all traces of
          the virus from the infected program and restore it to its original state.
          Remove the virus from all infected systems so that the disease cannot
          spread further.
      If detection succeeds but either identification or removal is not possible, then the
      alternative is to discard the infected program and reload a clean backup version.
          Advances in virus and antivirus technology go hand in hand. Early viruses
      were relatively simple code fragments and could be identified and purged with rela-
      tively simple antivirus software packages. As the virus arms race has evolved, both
      viruses and, necessarily, antivirus software have grown more complex and sophis-
      ticated. Increasingly sophisticated antivirus approaches and products continue to
      appear. In this subsection, we highlight two of the most important.
      GENERIC DECRYPTION         Generic decryption (GD) technology enables the antivirus
      program to easily detect even the most complex polymorphic viruses while
      maintaining fast scanning speeds [NACH97]. Recall that when a file containing a
      polymorphic virus is executed, the virus must decrypt itself to activate. In order
      to detect such a structure, executable files are run through a GD scanner, which
      contains the following elements:
         CPU emulator: A software-based virtual computer. Instructions in an execut-
          able file are interpreted by the emulator rather than executed on the under-
          lying processor. The emulator includes software versions of all registers and
          other processor hardware, so that the underlying processor is unaffected by
          programs interpreted on the emulator.
         Virus signature scanner: A module that scans the target code looking for
          known virus signatures.
       Emulation control module: Controls the execution of the target code.

         At the start of each simulation, the emulator begins interpreting instructions
     in the target code, one at a time. Thus, if the code includes a decryption routine that
     decrypts and hence exposes the virus, that code is interpreted. In effect, the virus
     does the work for the antivirus program by exposing the virus. Periodically, the
     control module interrupts interpretation to scan the target code for virus signatures.
         During interpretation, the target code can cause no damage to the actual per-
     sonal computer environment, because it is being interpreted in a completely con-
     trolled environment.
         The most difficult design issue with a GD scanner is to determine how long to
     run each interpretation. Typically, virus elements are activated soon after a program
     begins executing, but this need not be the case. The longer the scanner emulates a
     particular program, the more likely it is to catch any hidden viruses. However, the
     antivirus program can take up only a limited amount of time and resources before
     users complain of degraded system performance.
     DIGITAL IMMUNE SYSTEM  The digital immune system is a comprehensive approach
     to virus protection developed by IBM [KEPH97a, KEPH97b, WHIT99] and
     subsequently refined by Symantec [SYMA01]. The motivation for this development
     has been the rising threat of Internet-based virus propagation. We first say a few
     words about this threat and then summarize IBM's approach.
         Traditionally, the virus threat was characterized by the relatively slow spread
     of new viruses and new mutations. Antivirus software was typically updated on a
     monthly basis, and this was sufficient to control the problem. Also traditionally, the
     Internet played a comparatively small role in the spread of viruses. But as [CHES97]
     points out, two major trends in Internet technology have had an increasing impact
     on the rate of virus propagation in recent years:
        Integrated mail systems: Systems such as Lotus Notes and Microsoft Outlook
         make it very simple to send anything to anyone and to work with objects that
         are received.
        Mobile-program systems: Capabilities such as Java and ActiveX allow pro-
         grams to move on their own from one system to another.
         In response to the threat posed by these Internet-based capabilities, IBM has
     developed a prototype digital immune system. This system expands on the use of
     program emulation discussed in the preceding subsection and provides a general-
     purpose emulation and virus-detection system. The objective of this system is to
     provide rapid response time so that viruses can be stamped out almost as soon as
     they are introduced. When a new virus enters an organization, the immune system
     automatically captures it, analyzes it, adds detection and shielding for it, removes it,
     and passes information about that virus to systems running IBM AntiVirus so that it
     can be detected before it is allowed to run elsewhere.
         Figure 15.9 illustrates the typical steps in digital immune system operation:
     1.  A monitoring program on each PC uses a variety of heuristics based on system
         behavior, suspicious changes to programs, or family signature to infer that a
         virus may be present. The monitoring program forwards a copy of any program
         thought to be infected to an administrative machine within the organization.

                                                               1          Virus-
                                                                          infected
3              Virus                                                      client             Client
                                2      Administrative          5          machine            machine
Analyze virus  analysis                machine
behavior and   machine
structure                                                         6
                                       Private                                      Client
Extract                                network                    Client            machine
signature                                                      machine
               4
Derive
prescription   7
                                       Administrative                       Client
                                                machine
                                                                     Other          Client
                  Individual                           Client     private
                  user                                            network
Figure 15.9   Digital Immune System
2.           The administrative machine encrypts the sample and sends it to a central virus
             analysis machine.
3.           This machine creates an environment in which the infected program can be
             safely run for analysis. Techniques used for this purpose include emulation,
             or the creation of a protected environment within which the suspect program
             can be executed and monitored. The virus analysis machine then produces a
             prescription for identifying and removing the virus.
4.           The resulting prescription is sent back to the administrative machine.
5.           The administrative machine forwards the prescription to the infected client.
6.           The prescription is also forwarded to other clients in the organization.
7.           Subscribers around the world receive regular antivirus updates that protect
             them from the new virus.
             The success of the digital immune system depends on the ability of the virus
analysis machine to detect new and innovative virus strains. By constantly analyzing
and monitoring the viruses found in the wild, it should be possible to continually
update the digital immune software to keep up with the threat.
BEHAVIOR-BLOCKING SOFTWARE             Unlike heuristics or fingerprint-based scanners,
behavior blocking software integrates with the operating system of a host computer
and monitors program behavior in real time for malicious actions [CONR02,
NACH02]. The behavior blocking software then blocks potentially malicious actions
before they have a chance to affect the system. Monitored behaviors can include
 Attempts to open, view, delete, and/or modify files;
 Attempts to format disk drives and other unrecoverable disk operations;

                                                                          3. Behavior-blocking
                                                                          software at server flags
                                                                          suspicious code. The
                                                                          blocker "sandboxes" the
                                                                          suspicious software to
1. Administrator sets                                                     prevent it from proceeding.
acceptable software behavior
policies and uploads them to
a server. Policies can also be                                                                              Internet
uploaded to desktops.                                            Sandbox
                                                                       2. Malicious software
                                !                                      manages to make it
Administrator                                                          through the firewall.      Firewall
                                                       Server running
                       4. Server alerts administrator  behavior-blocking
                       that suspicious code has been   software
                       identified and sandboxed,
                       awaiting administrator's
                       decision on whether the code
                       should be removed or allowed
                       to run.
Figure 15.10     Behavior-Blocking Software Operation
                      Modifications to the logic of executable files or macros;
                      Modification of critical system settings, such as start-up settings;
                      Scripting of e-mail and instant messaging clients to send executable content; and
                      Initiation of network communications.
                       Figure 15.10 illustrates the operation of a behavior blocker. Behavior-blocking
     software runs on server and desktop computers and is instructed through policies
     set by the network administrator to let benign actions take place but to intercede
     when unauthorized or suspicious actions occur. The module blocks any suspicious
     software from executing. A blocker isolates the code in a sandbox, which restricts
     the code's access to various OS resources and applications. The blocker then sends
     an alert.
                       Because a behavior blocker can block suspicious software in real time, it has
     an advantage over such established antivirus detection techniques as fingerprinting
     or heuristics. While there are literally trillions of different ways to obfuscate and
     rearrange the instructions of a virus or worm, many of which will evade detection
     by a fingerprint scanner or heuristic, eventually malicious code must make a well-
     defined request to the operating system. Given that the behavior blocker can inter-
     cept all such requests, it can identify and block malicious actions regardless of how
     obfuscated the program logic appears to be.
                       Behavior blocking alone has limitations. Because the malicious code must run
     on the target machine before all its behaviors can be identified, it can cause harm

before it has been detected and blocked. For example, a new virus might shuffle a
number of seemingly unimportant files around the hard drive before infecting a single
file and being blocked. Even though the actual infection was blocked, the user may be
unable to locate his or her files, causing a loss to productivity or possibly worse.
Worm Countermeasures
There is considerable overlap in techniques for dealing with viruses and worms.
Once a worm is resident on a machine, antivirus software can be used to detect it.
In addition, because worm propagation generates considerable network activity,
network activity and usage monitoring can form the basis of a worm defense.
    To begin, let us consider the requirements for an effective worm countermeas-
ure scheme:
   Generality: The approach taken should be able to handle a wide variety of
    worm attacks, including polymorphic worms.
   Timeliness: The approach should respond quickly so as to limit the number
    infected systems and the number of generated transmissions from infected
    systems.
   Resiliency: The approach should be resistant to evasion techniques employed
    by attackers to evade worm countermeasures.
   Minimal denial-of-service costs: The approach should result in minimal reduc-
    tion in capacity or service due to the actions of the countermeasure software.
    That is, in an attempt to contain worm propagation, the countermeasure
    should not significantly disrupt normal operation.
   Transparency: The countermeasure software and devices should not require
    modification to existing (legacy) OSs, application software, and hardware.
   Global and local coverage: The approach should be able to deal with attack
    sources both from outside and inside the enterprise network.
    No existing worm countermeasure scheme appears to satisfy all these require-
ments. Thus, administrators typically need to use multiple approaches in defending
against worm attacks.
    Following [JHI07], we list six classes of worm defense:
A.  Signature-based worm scan filtering: This type of approach generates a worm
    signature, which is then used to prevent worm scans from entering/leaving a
    network/host. Typically, this approach involves identifying suspicious flows
    and generating a worm signature. This approach is vulnerable to the use of
    polymorphic worms: Either the detection software misses the worm or, if it
    is sufficiently sophisticated to deal with polymorphic worms, the scheme may
    take a long time to react. [NEWS05] is an example of this approach.
B.  Filter-based worm containment: This approach is similar to class A but focuses
    on worm content rather than a scan signature. The filter checks a message
    to determine if it contains worm code. An example is Vigilante [COST05],
    which relies on collaborative worm detection at end hosts. This approach can
    be quite effective but requires efficient detection algorithms and rapid alert
    dissemination.

     C.  Payload-classification-based  worm  containment:       These        network-based
         techniques examine packets to see if they contain a worm. Various anomaly
         detection techniques can be used, but care is needed to avoid high levels
         of false positives or negatives. An example of this approach is reported in
         [CHIN05], which looks for exploit code in network flows. This approach does
         not generate signatures based on byte patterns but rather looks for control
         and data flow structures that suggest an exploit.
     D.  Threshold random walk (TRW) scan detection: TRW exploits randomness in
         picking destinations to connect to as a way of detecting if a scanner is in opera-
         tion [JUNG04]. TRW is suitable for deployment in high-speed, low-cost net-
         work devices. It is effective against the common behavior seen in worm scans.
     E.  Rate limiting: This class limits the rate of scanlike traffic from an infected host.
         Various strategies can be used, including limiting the number of new machines
         a host can connect to in a window of time, detecting a high connection fail-
         ure rate, and limiting the number of unique IP addresses a host can scan in a
         window of time. [CHEN04] is an example. This class of countermeasures may
         introduce longer delays for normal traffic. This class is also not suited for slow,
         stealthy worms that spread slowly to avoid detection based on activity level.
     F.  Rate halting: This approach immediately blocks outgoing traffic when a
         threshold is exceeded either in outgoing connection rate or diversity of con-
         nection attempts [JHI07]. The approach must include measures to quickly
         unblock mistakenly blocked hosts in a transparent way. Rate halting can inte-
         grate with a signature- or filter-based approach so that once a signature or
         filter is generated, every blocked host can be unblocked. Rate halting appears
         to offer a very effective countermeasure. As with rate limiting, rate halting
         techniques are not suitable for slow, stealthy worms.
     Bot Countermeasures
     A number of the countermeasures discussed in this chapter make sense against bots,
     including IDSs and digital immune systems. Once bots are activated and an attack is
     underway, these countermeasures can be used to detect the attack. But the primary
     objective is to try to detect and disable the botnet during its construction phase.
     Rootkit Countermeasures
     Rootkits can be extraordinarily difficult to detect and neutralize, particularly so
     for kernel-level rootkits. Many of the administrative tools that could be used to
     detect a rootkit or its traces can be compromised by the rootkit precisely so that it
     is undetectable.
         Countering rootkits requires a variety of network- and computer-level secu-
     rity tools. Both network-based and host-based intrusion detection systems can look
     for the code signatures of known rootkit attacks in incoming traffic. Host-based
     antivirus software can also be used to recognize the known signatures.
         Of course, there are always new rootkits and modified versions of existing
     rootkits that display novel signatures. For these cases, a system needs to look for
     behaviors that could indicate the presence of a rootkit, such as the interception of

      system calls or a keylogger interacting with a keyboard driver. Such behavior detec-
      tion is far from straightforward. For example, antivirus software typically intercepts
      system calls.
         Another approach is to do some sort of file integrity check. An example of
      this is RootkitRevealer, a freeware package from SysInternals. The package com-
      pares the results of a system scan using APIs with the actual view of storage using
      instructions that do not go through an API. Because a rootkit conceals itself by
      modifying the view of storage seen by administrator calls, RootkitRevealer catches
      the discrepancy.
         If a kernel-level rootkit is detected, by any means, the only secure and reliable
      way to recover is to do an entire new OS install on the infected machine.
15.5  DEALING WITH BUFFER OVERFLOW ATTACKS3
      Finding and exploiting a stack buffer overflow is not difficult. The large number
      of exploits over the previous couple of decades clearly illustrates this. There is
      consequently a need to defend systems against such attacks by either preventing
      them, or at least detecting and aborting such attacks. This section discusses possible
      approaches to implementing such protections. These can be broadly classified into
      two categories:
        Compile-time defenses, which aim to harden programs to resist attacks in new
         programs
        Run-time defenses, which aim to detect and abort attacks in existing programs
      While suitable defenses have been known for a couple of decades, the very large
      existing base of vulnerable software and systems hinders their deployment; hence
      the interest in run-time defenses, which can be deployed in operating systems and
      updates and can provide some protection for existing vulnerable programs. Most of
      these techniques are mentioned in [LHEE03].
      Compile-Time Defenses
      Compile-time defenses aim to prevent or detect buffer overflows by instrument-
      ing programs when they are compiled. The possibilities for doing this range from
      choosing a high-level language that does not permit buffer overflows to encourag-
      ing safe coding standards, using safe standard libraries, or including additional code
      to detect corruption of the stack frame.
      CHOICE OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE            One possibility is to write the program using
      a modern high-level programming language, one that has a strong notion of variable
      type and what constitutes permissible operations on them. Such languages are not
      vulnerable to buffer overflow attacks, because their compilers include additional
      code to enforce range checks automatically, removing the need for the programmer
      to explicitly code them. The flexibility and safety provided by these languages
      3The material in this section was developed by Lawrie Brown of the Australian Defence Force Academy.

     does come at a cost in resource use, both at compile time and also in additional
     code that must execute at run-time to impose checks such as that on buffer limits.
     These disadvantages are much less significant than they used to be, due to the rapid
     increase in processor performance. Increasingly programs are being written in these
     languages and hence should be immune to buffer overflows in their code (though
     if they use existing system libraries or run-time execution environments written in
     less safe languages, they may still be vulnerable). The distance from the underlying
     machine language and architecture also means that access to some instructions and
     hardware resources is lost. This limits their usefulness in writing code, such as device
     drivers, that must interact with such resources. For these reasons, there is still likely
     to be at least some code written in less safe languages such as C.
     SAFE CODING TECHNIQUES  If languages such as C are being used, programmers
     need to be aware that their ability to manipulate pointer addresses and access
     memory directly comes at a cost. C was designed as a systems programming
     language, running on systems that were vastly smaller and more constrained than
     we now use. This meant that C's designers placed much more emphasis on space
     efficiency and performance considerations than on type safety. They assumed that
     programmers would exercise due care in writing code using these languages and
     take responsibility for ensuring the safe use of all data structures and variables.
     Unfortunately, as several decades of experience has shown, this has not been
     the case. This may be seen in large legacy body of potentially unsafe code in the
     UNIX and Linux operating systems and applications, some of which are potentially
     vulnerable to buffer overflows.15.6 azx.
     In order to harden these systems, the programmer needs to inspect the code
     and rewrite any unsafe coding constructs in a safe manner. Given the rapid uptake
     of buffer overflow exploits, this process has begun in some cases. A good exam-
     ple is the OpenBSD project, which produces a free, multiplatform 4.4BSD-based
     UNIX-like operating system. Among other technology changes, programmers have
     undertaken an extensive audit of the existing code base, including the operating
     system, standard libraries, and common utilities. This has resulted in what is widely
     regarded as one of the safest operating systems in widespread use. The OpenBSD
     project claims as of mid-2006 that there has only been one remote hole discov-
     ered in the default install in more than 8 years. This is a clearly enviable record.
     Microsoft have also undertaken a major project in reviewing their code base, partly
     in response to continuing bad publicity over the number of vulnerabilities, including
     many buffer overflow issues, that have been found in their operating systems and
     applications code. This has clearly been a difficult process, though they claim that
     their new Vista operating system will benefit greatly from this process.
     LANGUAGE  EXTENSIONS    AND  USE          OF  SAFE  LIBRARIES       Given the problems
     that can occur in C with unsafe array and pointer references, there have been a
     number of proposals to augment compilers to automatically insert range checks
     on such references. While this is fairly easy for statically allocated arrays, handling
     dynamically allocated memory is more problematic, because the size information
     is not available at compile-time. Handling this requires an extension to the
     semantics of a pointer to include bounds information and the use of library routines

to ensure that these values are set correctly. Several such approaches are listed in
[LHEE03]. However, there is generally a performance penalty with the use of
such techniques that may or may not be acceptable. These techniques also require
all programs and libraries that require these safety features to be recompiled with
the modified compiler. While this can be feasible for a new release of an operating
system and its associated utilities, there will still likely be problems with third-
party applications.
A common concern with C comes from the use of unsafe standard library
routines, especially some of the string manipulation routines. One approach to
improving the safety of systems has been to replace these with safer variants. This
can include the provision of new functions, such as strlcpy() in the BSD fam-
ily of systems, including OpenBSD. Using these requires rewriting the source to
conform to the new safer semantics. Alternatively, it involves replacement of the
standard string library with a safer variant. Libsafe is a well-known example of
this. It implements the standard semantics but includes additional checks to ensure
that the copy operations do not extend beyond the local variable space in the stack
frame. So, while it cannot prevent corruption of adjacent local variables, it can
prevent any modification of the old stack frame and return address values, and
thus prevent the classic stack buffer overflow types of attack we examined previ-
ously. This library is implemented as a dynamic library, arranged to load before
the existing standard libraries, and can thus provide protection for existing pro-
grams without requiring them to be recompiled, provided they dynamically access
the standard library routines (as most programs do). The modified library code has
been found to typically be at least as efficient as the standard libraries, and thus
its use is an easy way of protecting existing programs against some forms of buffer
overflow attacks.
STACK PROTECTION MECHANISMS  An effective method for protecting programs
against classic stack overflow attacks is to instrument the function entry and exit
code to setup and then check its stack frame for any evidence of corruption. If
any modification is found, the program is aborted rather than allowing the attack
to proceed. There are several approaches to providing this protection, which we
discuss next.
Stackguard is one of the best known protection mechanisms. It is a GCC
(GNU Compiler Collection) compiler extension that inserts additional function
entry and exit code. The added function entry code writes a canary4 value below
the old frame pointer address, before the allocation of space for local variables.
The added function exit code checks that the canary value has not changed before
continuing with the usual function exit operations of restoring the old frame pointer
and transferring control back to the return address. Any attempt at a classic stack
buffer overflow would have to alter this value in order to change the old frame
pointer and return addresses, and would thus be detected, resulting in the program
being aborted. For this defense to function successfully, it is critical that the canary
4Named after the miner's canary used to detect poisonous air in a mine and thus warn the miners in time
for them to escape.

     value be unpredictable and should be different on different systems. If this were not
     the case, the attacker would simply ensure the shellcode included the correct canary
     value in the required location. Typically, a random value is chosen as the canary
     value on process creation and saved as part of the processes state. The code added
     to the function entry and exit then uses this value.
     There are some issues with using this approach. First, it requires that all pro-
     grams needing protection be recompiled. Second, because the structure of the stack
     frame has changed, it can cause problems with programs, such as debuggers, which
     analyze stack frames. However, the canary technique has been used to recompile an
     entire Linux distribution and provide it with a high level of resistance to stack over-
     flow attacks. Similar functionality is available for Windows programs by compiling
     them using Microsoft's /GS Visual C++ compiler option.
     Run-Time Defenses
     As has been noted, most of the compile-time approaches require recompilation
     of existing programs. Hence, there is interest in run-time defenses that can be
     deployed as operating systems updates to provide some protection for existing vul-
     nerable programs. These defenses involve changes to the memory management of
     the virtual address space of processes. These changes act either to alter the proper-
     ties of regions of memory or to make predicting the location of targeted buffers
     sufficiently difficult to thwart many types of attacks.
     EXECUTABLE ADDRESS SPACE PROTECTION  Many of the buffer overflow attacks
     involve copying machine code into the targeted buffer and then transferring
     execution to it. A possible defense is to block the execution of code on the stack,
     on the assumption that executable code should only be found elsewhere in the
     processes address space.
     To support this feature efficiently requires support from the processor's
     memory management unit (MMU) to tag pages of virtual memory as being nonex-
     ecutable. Some processors, such as the SPARC used by Solaris, have had support
     for this for some time. Enabling its use in Solaris requires a simple kernel param-
     eter change. Other processors, such as the x86 family, have not had this support
     until recently, with the relatively recent addition of the no-execute bit in its MMU.
     Extensions have been made available to Linux, BSD, and other UNIX-style sys-
     tems to support the use of this feature. Some indeed are also capable of protecting
     the heap as well as the stack, which also is the target of attacks. Support for enabling
     no-execute protection is also included in recent Windows systems.
     Making the stack (and heap) nonexecutable provides a high degree of pro-
     tection against many types of buffer overflow attacks for existing programs; hence
     the inclusion of this practice is standard in a number of recent operating systems
     releases. However, one issue is support for programs that do need to place execut-
     able code on the stack. This can occur, for example, in just-in-time compilers, such
     as is used in the Java Run-time system. Executable code on the stack is also used to
     implement nested functions in C (a GCC extension) and also Linux signal handlers.
     Special provisions are needed to support these requirements. Nonetheless, this is
     regarded as one of the best methods for protecting existing programs and hardening
     systems against some attacks.

      ADDRESS SPACE RANDOMIZATION       Another run-time technique that can be used
      to thwart attacks involves manipulation of the location of key data structures in a
      processes address space. In particular, recall that in order to implement the classic
      stack overflow attack, the attacker needs to be able to predict the approximate
      location of the targeted buffer. The attacker uses this predicted address to determine
      a suitable return address to use in the attack to transfer control to the shellcode. One
      technique to greatly increase the difficulty of this prediction is to change the address
      at which the stack is located in a random manner for each process. The range of
      addresses available on modern processors is large (32 bits), and most programs only
      need a small fraction of that. Therefore, moving the stack memory region around by
      a megabyte or so has minimal impact on most programs but makes predicting the
      targeted buffer's address almost impossible.
      Another target of attack is the location of standard library routines. In an
      attempt to bypass protections such as nonexecutable stacks, some buffer overflow
      variants exploit existing code in standard libraries. These are typically loaded at
      the same address by the same program. To counter this form of attack, we can use
      a security extension that randomizes the order of loading standard libraries by a
      program and their virtual memory address locations. This makes the address of any
      specific function sufficiently unpredictable as to render the chance of a given attack
      correctly predicting its address very low.
      The OpenBSD system includes versions of these extensions in its technologi-
      cal support for a secure system.
      GUARD PAGES     A final run-time technique that can be used places guard pages
      between critical regions of memory in a processes address space. Again, this
      exploits the fact that a process has much more virtual memory available than
      it typically needs. Gaps are placed between the ranges of addresses used for
      each of the components of the address space. These gaps, or guard pages, are
      flagged in the MMU as illegal addresses, and any attempt to access them results
      in the process being aborted. This can prevent buffer overflow attacks, typically
      of global data, which attempt to overwrite adjacent regions in the processes
      address space.
      A further extension places guard pages between stack frames or between dif-
      ferent allocations on the heap. This can provide further protection against stack and
      heap overflow attacks, but at cost in execution time supporting the large number of
      page mappings necessary.
15.6  WINDOWS 7 SECURITY
      A good example of the access control concepts we have been discussing is the
      Windows access control facility, which exploits object-oriented concepts to provide
      a powerful and flexible access control capability.
      Windows provides a uniform access control facility that applies to processes,
      threads, files, semaphores, windows, and other objects. Access control is governed
      by two entities: an access token associated with each process and a security descrip-
      tor associated with each object for which interprocess access is possible.
