Operating System Overview
OPERATING SYSTEM OVERVIEW
    2.1   Operating System Objectives and Functions
                 The Operating System as a User/Computer Interface
                 The Operating System as Resource Manager
                 Ease of Evolution of an Operating System
    2.2   The Evolution of Operating Systems
                 Serial Processing
                 Simple Batch Systems
                 Multiprogrammed Batch Systems
                 Time-Sharing Systems
    2.3   Major Achievements
                 The Process
                 Memory Management
                 Information Protection and Security
                 Scheduling and Resource Management
    2.4   Developments Leading to Modern Operating Systems
    2.5   Virtual Machines
                 Virtual Machines and Virtualizing
                 Virtual Machine Architecture
    2.6   OS Design Considerations for Multiprocessor and Multicore
                 Symmetric Multiprocessor OS Considerations
                 Multicore OS Considerations
    2.7   Microsoft Windows Overview
                 History
                 The Modern OS
                 Architecture
                 Client/Server Model
                 Threads and SMP
                 Windows Objects
                 What Is New in Windows 7
    2.8   Traditional Unix Systems
                 History
                 Description
    2.9   Modern Unix Systems
                 System V Release 4 (SVR4)
                 BSD
                 Solaris 10
    2.10  Linux
                 History
                 Modular Structure
                 Kernel Components
    2.11  Linux Vserver Virtual Machine Architecture
    2.12  Recommended Reading and Web Sites
    2.13  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
46

   Operating systems are those programs that interface the machine with
   the applications programs. The main function of these systems is to
   dynamically allocate the shared system resources to the executing
   programs. As such, research in this area is clearly concerned with
   the management and scheduling of memory, processes, and other
   devices. But the interface with adjacent levels continues to shift with
   time. Functions that were originally part of the operating system have
   migrated to the hardware. On the other side, programmed functions
   extraneous to the problems being solved by the application programs
   are included in the operating system.
   --WHAT CAN BE AUTOMATED?: THE COMPUTER SCIENCE AND
                                  ENGINEERING RESEARCH STUDY, MIT Press, 1980
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
  Summarize, at a top level, the key functions of an operating system (OS).
  Discuss the evolution of operating systems for early simple batch systems to
   modern complex systems.
  Give a brief explanation of each of the major achievements in OS research,
   as defined in Section 2.3.
  Discuss the key design areas that have been instrumental in the development
   of modern operating systems.
  Define and discuss virtual machines and virtualization
  Understand the OS design issues raised by the introduction of multiprocessor
   and multicore organization.
  Understand the basic structure of Windows 7.
  Describe the essential elements of a traditional UNIX system.
  Explain the new features found in modern UNIX systems.
  Discuss Linux and its relationship to UNIX.
We begin our study of operating systems (OSs) with a brief history. This history is
itself interesting and also serves the purpose of providing an overview of OS prin-
ciples. The first section examines the objectives and functions of operating systems.
Then we look at how operating systems have evolved from primitive batch systems
to sophisticated multitasking, multiuser systems. The remainder of the chapter looks
at the history and general characteristics of the two operating systems that serve as
examples throughout this book. All of the material in this chapter is covered in
greater depth later in the book.

2.1  OPERATING SYSTEM OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS
     An OS is a program that controls the execution of application programs and acts as
     an interface between applications and the computer hardware. It can be thought of
     as having three objectives:
       Convenience: An OS makes a computer more convenient to use.
       Efficiency: An OS allows the computer system resources to be used in an effi-
        cient manner.
       Ability to evolve: An OS should be constructed in such a way as to permit the
        effective development, testing, and introduction of new system functions with-
        out interfering with service.
        Let us examine these three aspects of an OS in turn.
     The Operating System as a User/Computer Interface
     The hardware and software used in providing applications to a user can be viewed
     in a layered or hierarchical fashion, as depicted in Figure 2.1. The user of those
     applications, the end user, generally is not concerned with the details of computer
     hardware. Thus, the end user views a computer system in terms of a set of applica-
     tions. An application can be expressed in a programming language and is developed
     by an application programmer. If one were to develop an application program as a
     set of machine instructions that is completely responsible for controlling the com-
     puter hardware, one would be faced with an overwhelmingly complex undertaking.
     To ease this chore, a set of system programs is provided. Some of these programs
     are referred to as utilities, or library programs. These implement frequently used
     functions that assist in program creation, the management of files, and the control of
        Application                         Application programs
     programming interface
        Application                         Libraries/utilities                Software
        binary interface
                                            Operating system
        Instruction set
        architecture
                                       Execution hardware
                                       System interconnect        Memory
                                                    (bus)         translation  Hardware
                                       I/O devices                Main
                                       and                        memory
                                       networking
     Figure 2.1  Computer   Hardware and Software Structure
