Windows 7 Security
                                                    15.6 / WINDOWS 7 SECURITY                   667
      ADDRESS SPACE RANDOMIZATION       Another run-time technique that can be used
      to thwart attacks involves manipulation of the location of key data structures in a
      processes address space. In particular, recall that in order to implement the classic
      stack overflow attack, the attacker needs to be able to predict the approximate
      location of the targeted buffer. The attacker uses this predicted address to determine
      a suitable return address to use in the attack to transfer control to the shellcode. One
      technique to greatly increase the difficulty of this prediction is to change the address
      at which the stack is located in a random manner for each process. The range of
      addresses available on modern processors is large (32 bits), and most programs only
      need a small fraction of that. Therefore, moving the stack memory region around by
      a megabyte or so has minimal impact on most programs but makes predicting the
      targeted buffer's address almost impossible.
      Another target of attack is the location of standard library routines. In an
      attempt to bypass protections such as nonexecutable stacks, some buffer overflow
      variants exploit existing code in standard libraries. These are typically loaded at
      the same address by the same program. To counter this form of attack, we can use
      a security extension that randomizes the order of loading standard libraries by a
      program and their virtual memory address locations. This makes the address of any
      specific function sufficiently unpredictable as to render the chance of a given attack
      correctly predicting its address very low.
      The OpenBSD system includes versions of these extensions in its technologi-
      cal support for a secure system.
      GUARD PAGES     A final run-time technique that can be used places guard pages
      between critical regions of memory in a processes address space. Again, this
      exploits the fact that a process has much more virtual memory available than
      it typically needs. Gaps are placed between the ranges of addresses used for
      each of the components of the address space. These gaps, or guard pages, are
      flagged in the MMU as illegal addresses, and any attempt to access them results
      in the process being aborted. This can prevent buffer overflow attacks, typically
      of global data, which attempt to overwrite adjacent regions in the processes
      address space.
      A further extension places guard pages between stack frames or between dif-
      ferent allocations on the heap. This can provide further protection against stack and
      heap overflow attacks, but at cost in execution time supporting the large number of
      page mappings necessary.
15.6  WINDOWS 7 SECURITY
      A good example of the access control concepts we have been discussing is the
      Windows access control facility, which exploits object-oriented concepts to provide
      a powerful and flexible access control capability.
      Windows provides a uniform access control facility that applies to processes,
      threads, files, semaphores, windows, and other objects. Access control is governed
      by two entities: an access token associated with each process and a security descrip-
      tor associated with each object for which interprocess access is possible.

668  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
     Access Control Scheme
     When a user logs on to a Windows system, Windows uses a name/password scheme
     to authenticate the user. If the logon is accepted, a process is created for the user and
     an access token is associated with that process object. The access token, whose details
     are described later, include a security ID (SID), which is the identifier by which this
     user is known to the system for purposes of security. The token also contains SIDs
     for the security groups to which the user belongs. If the initial user process spawns a
     new process, the new process object inherits the same access token.
         The access token serves two purposes:
     1.  It keeps all necessary security information together to speed access validation.
         When any process associated with a user attempts access, the security subsys-
         tem can make use of the token associated with that process to determine the
         user's access privileges.
     2.  It allows each process to modify its security characteristics in limited ways
         without affecting other processes running on behalf of the user.
         The chief significance of the second point has to do with privileges that may be
     associated with a user. The access token indicates which privileges a user may have.
     Generally, the token is initialized with each of these privileges in a disabled state.
     Subsequently, if one of the user's processes needs to perform a privileged opera-
     tion, the process may enable the appropriate privilege and attempt access. It would
     be undesirable to share the same token among all of the user's processes, because in
     that case enabling a privilege for one process enables it for all of them.
         Associated with each object for which interprocess access is possible is a security
     descriptor. The chief component of the security descriptor is an access control list that
     specifies access rights for various users and user groups for this object. When a process
     attempts to access this object, the SIDs in the process token are matched against the
     access control list of the object to determine if access will be allowed or denied.
         When an application opens a reference to a securable object, Windows veri-
     fies that the object's security descriptor grants the process the requested access. If
     the check succeeds, Windows caches the resulting granted access rights.
         An important aspect of Windows security is the concept of impersonation,
     which simplifies the use of security in a client/server environment. If client and
     server talk through a RPC connection, the server can temporarily assume the iden-
     tity of the client so that it can evaluate a request for access relative to that client's
     rights. After the access, the server reverts to its own identity.
     Access Token
     Figure 15.11a shows the general structure of an access token, which includes the
     following parameters:
        Security ID: Identifies a user uniquely across all of the machines on the net-
         work. This generally corresponds to a user's logon name. Special user SIDs
         were added in Windows 7 for use by processes and services. These specially
         managed SIDs are designed for secure management; they do not use the ordi-
         nary password polices human accounts do.

                                               15.6   /  WINDOWS  7 SECURITY        669
   Security ID (SID)         Flags                                ACL header
   Group SIDS                Owner                                ACE header
   Privileges                System access                        Access mask
   Default owner             control list                         SID
   Default ACL               Discretionary                        ACE header
                             access
                             control list                         Access mask
                                                                  SID
   (a) Access token          (b) Security descriptor     (c) Access control list
   Figure 15.11   Windows Security Structures
  Group SIDs: A list of the groups to which this user belongs. A group is simply
   a set of user IDs that are identified as a group for purposes of access control.
   Each group has a unique group SID. Access to an object can be defined on the
   basis of group SIDs, individual SIDs, or a combination. There is also a SID
   which reflects the process integrity level (low, medium, high, or system).
  Privileges: A list of security-sensitive system services that this user may call,
   for example CreateToken. Another example is the SeBackupPrivilege; users
   with this privilege are allowed to use a backup tool to back up files that they
   normally would not be able to read.
  Default owner: If this process creates another object, this field specifies the
   owner of the new object. Generally, the owner of a new object is the same
   as the owner of the spawning process. However, a user may specify that the
   default owner of any processes spawned by this process is a group SID to
   which this user belongs.
  Default ACL: This is an initial list of protections applied to the objects that
   the user creates. The user may subsequently alter the ACL for any object that
   it owns or that one of its groups owns.
Security Descriptors
Figure 15.11b shows the general structure of a security descriptor, which includes
the following parameters:
  Flags: Define the type and contents of a security descriptor. The flags indicate
   whether or not the SACL and DACL are present, whether or not they were
   placed on the object by a defaulting mechanism, and whether the pointers
   in the descriptor use absolute or relative addressing. Relative descriptors are
   required for objects that are transmitted over a network, such as information
   transmitted in a RPC.

670  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
       Owner: The owner of the object can generally perform any action on the secu-
        rity descriptor. The owner can be an individual or a group SID. The owner has
        the authority to change the contents of the DACL.
       System access control list (SACL): Specifies what kinds of operations on the
        object should generate audit messages. An application must have the corre-
        sponding privilege in its access token to read or write the SACL of any object.
        This is to prevent unauthorized applications from reading SACLs (thereby
        learning what not to do to avoid generating audits) or writing them (to gener-
        ate many audits to cause an illicit operation to go unnoticed). The SACL also
        specifies the object integrity level. Processes cannot modify an object unless
        the process integrity level meets or exceeds the level on the object.
       Discretionary access control list (DACL): Determines which users and groups
        can access this object for which operations. It consists of a list of access control
        entries (ACEs).
        When an object is created, the creating process can assign as owner its own
     SID or any group SID in its access token. The creating process cannot assign an
     owner that is not in the current access token. Subsequently, any process that has
     been granted the right to change the owner of an object may do so, but again with
     the same restriction. The reason for the restriction is to prevent a user from cover-
     ing his or her tracks after attempting some unauthorized action.
        Let us look in more detail at the structure of access control lists, because
     these are at the heart of the Windows access control facility (Figure 15.11c). Each
     list consists of an overall header and a variable number of access control entries.
     Each entry specifies an individual or group SID and an access mask that defines
     the rights to be granted to this SID. When a process attempts to access an object,
     the object manager in the Windows Executive reads the SID and group SIDs from
     the access token along with the integrity level SID. If the access requested includes
     modifying the object, the integrity level is checked against the object integrity level
     in the SACL. If that test passes, the object manager then scans down the object's
     DACL. If a match is found--that is, if an ACE is found with a SID that matches
     one of the SIDs from the access token--then the process can have the access rights
     specified by the access mask in that ACE. This also may include denying access, in
     which case the access request fails. The first matching ACE determines the result
     of the access check.
        Figure 15.12 shows the contents of the access mask. The least significant 16 bits
     specify access rights that apply to a particular type of object. For example, bit
     0 for a file object is FILE_READ_DATA access and bit 0 for an event object is
     EVENT_QUERY_STATE access.
        The most significant 16 bits of the mask contains bits that apply to all types of
     objects. Five of these are referred to as standard access types:
       Synchronize: Gives permission to synchronize execution with some event asso-
        ciated with this object. In particular, this object can be used in a wait function.
       Write_owner: Allows a program to modify the owner of the object. This is
        useful because the owner of an object can always change the protection on the
        object. (The owner may not be denied Write DAC access.)

                                                        15.6 / WINDOWS 7 SECURITY       671
              Delete
              Read control
              Write DAC
              Write owner
   Generic    Synchronize
access types
                                Standard                Specific access types
                                access types
                                Access system security
                                Maximum allowed
              Generic all
              Generic execute
              Generic write
              Generic read
Figure 15.12  Access Mask
  Write_DAC: Allows the application to modify the DACL and hence the
   protection on this object.
  Read_control: Allows the application to query the owner and DACL fields of
   the security descriptor of this object.
  Delete: Allows the application to delete this object.
   The high-order half of the access mask also contains the four generic access
types. These bits provide a convenient way to set specific access types in a number
of different object types. For example, suppose an application wishes to create sev-
eral types of objects and ensure that users have read access to the objects, even
though read has a somewhat different meaning for each object type. To protect
each object of each type without the generic access bits, the application would have
to construct a different ACE for each type of object and be careful to pass the cor-
rect ACE when creating each object. It is more convenient to create a single ACE
that expresses the generic concept "allow read," and simply apply this ACE to each
object that is created, and have the right thing happen. That is the purpose of the
generic access bits, which are
  Generic_all: Allow all access
  Generic_execute: Allow execution if executable
  Generic_write: Allow write access
  Generic_read: Allow read-only access
   The generic bits also affect the standard access types. For example, for
a file object, the Generic_Read bit maps to the standard bits Read_Control and
Synchronize and to the object-specific bits File_Read_Data, File_Read_Attributes,
and File_Read_EA. Placing an ACE on a file object that grants some SID Generic_
Read grants those five access rights as if they had been specified individually in the
access mask.

672  CHAPTER 15 / COMPUTER SECURITY TECHNIQUES
         The remaining two bits in the access mask have special meanings. The Access_
     System_Security bit allows modifying audit and alarm control for this object.
     However, not only must this bit be set in the ACE for a SID but the access token for
     the process with that SID must have the corresponding privilege enabled.
         Finally, the Maximum_Allowed bit is not really an access bit, but a bit that
     modifies the algorithm for scanning the DACL for this SID. Normally, Windows
     will scan through the DACL until it reaches an ACE that specifically grants (bit
     set) or denies (bit not set) the access requested by the requesting process or until it
     reaches the end of the DACL, in which latter case access is denied. The Maximum_
     Allowed bit allows the object's owner to define a set of access rights that is the
     maximum that will be allowed to a given user. With this in mind, suppose that an
     application does not know all of the operations that it is going to be asked to per-
     form on an object during a session. There are three options for requesting access:
     1.  Attempt to open the object for all possible accesses. The disadvantage of this
         approach is that the access may be denied even though the application may
         have all of the access rights actually required for this session.
     2.  Only open the object when a specific access is requested, and open a new han-
         dle to the object for each different type of request. This is generally the pre-
         ferred method because it will not unnecessarily deny access, nor will it allow
         more access than necessary. In many cases the object itself does not need to
         be referenced a second time, but the DuplicateHandle function can be used to
         make a copy of the handle with a lower level of access.
     3.  Attempt to open the object for as much access as the object will allow this
         SID. The advantage is that the user will not be artificially denied access, but
         the application may have more access than it needs. This latter situation may
         mask bugs in the application.
         An important feature of Windows security is that applications can make
     use of the Windows security framework for user-defined objects. For example, a
     database server might create its own security descriptors and attach them to por-
     tions of a database. In addition to normal read/write access constraints, the server
     could secure database-specific operations, such as scrolling within a result set or
     performing a join. It would be the server's responsibility to define the meaning of
     special rights and perform access checks. But the checks would occur in a stand-
     ard context, using systemwide user/group accounts and audit logs. The extensible
     security model should also prove useful to implementers of non-Microsoft file
     systems.
15.7 RECOMMENDED READING AND WEB SITES
     The topics in this chapter are covered in more detail in [STAL08].
         [OGOR03] is the paper to read for an authoritative survey of user authenti-
     cation. [BURR04] is also a worthwhile survey. [SAND94] is an excellent overview
     of access control. [SAND96] is a comprehensive overview of RBAC. [SAUN01]
     compares RBAC and DAC. [SCAR07] is a detailed and worthwhile treatment
