Recommended Reading and Web Sites
         The remaining two bits in the access mask have special meanings. The Access_
     System_Security bit allows modifying audit and alarm control for this object.
     However, not only must this bit be set in the ACE for a SID but the access token for
     the process with that SID must have the corresponding privilege enabled.
         Finally, the Maximum_Allowed bit is not really an access bit, but a bit that
     modifies the algorithm for scanning the DACL for this SID. Normally, Windows
     will scan through the DACL until it reaches an ACE that specifically grants (bit
     set) or denies (bit not set) the access requested by the requesting process or until it
     reaches the end of the DACL, in which latter case access is denied. The Maximum_
     Allowed bit allows the object's owner to define a set of access rights that is the
     maximum that will be allowed to a given user. With this in mind, suppose that an
     application does not know all of the operations that it is going to be asked to per-
     form on an object during a session. There are three options for requesting access:
     1.  Attempt to open the object for all possible accesses. The disadvantage of this
         approach is that the access may be denied even though the application may
         have all of the access rights actually required for this session.
     2.  Only open the object when a specific access is requested, and open a new han-
         dle to the object for each different type of request. This is generally the pre-
         ferred method because it will not unnecessarily deny access, nor will it allow
         more access than necessary. In many cases the object itself does not need to
         be referenced a second time, but the DuplicateHandle function can be used to
         make a copy of the handle with a lower level of access.
     3.  Attempt to open the object for as much access as the object will allow this
         SID. The advantage is that the user will not be artificially denied access, but
         the application may have more access than it needs. This latter situation may
         mask bugs in the application.
         An important feature of Windows security is that applications can make
     use of the Windows security framework for user-defined objects. For example, a
     database server might create its own security descriptors and attach them to por-
     tions of a database. In addition to normal read/write access constraints, the server
     could secure database-specific operations, such as scrolling within a result set or
     performing a join. It would be the server's responsibility to define the meaning of
     special rights and perform access checks. But the checks would occur in a stand-
     ard context, using systemwide user/group accounts and audit logs. The extensible
     security model should also prove useful to implementers of non-Microsoft file
     systems.
15.7 RECOMMENDED READING AND WEB SITES
     The topics in this chapter are covered in more detail in [STAL08].
         [OGOR03] is the paper to read for an authoritative survey of user authenti-
     cation. [BURR04] is also a worthwhile survey. [SAND94] is an excellent overview
     of access control. [SAND96] is a comprehensive overview of RBAC. [SAUN01]
     compares RBAC and DAC. [SCAR07] is a detailed and worthwhile treatment

of intrusion detection. Two short but useful survey articles on the subject are
[KENT00] and [MCHU00]. [NING04] surveys recent advances in intrusion
detection techniques. Good overview articles on antivirus approaches and mal-
ware defense generally are [CASS01], [FORR97], [KEPH97a], and [NACH97].
[LHEE03] surveys a range of alternative buffer overflow techniques, including a
number not mentioned in this chapter, along with possible defensive techniques.
The original published description of buffer overflow attacks is given in [LEVY96].
[KUPE05] is a good overview.
BURR04   Burr, W., Dodson, D., and Polk, W. Electronic Authentication Guideline.
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Special
Publication 800-63, September 2004.
CASS01   Cass, S. "Anatomy of Malice." IEEE Spectrum, November 2001.
FORR97   Forrest, S., Hofmeyr, S., and Somayaji, A. "Computer Immunology."
Communications of the ACM, October 1997.
KENT00   Kent, S. "On the Trail of Intrusions into Information Systems." IEEE
Spectrum, December 2000.
KEPH97a  Kephart, J., Sorkin, G., Chess, D., and White, S. "Fighting Computer
Viruses." Scientific American, November 1997.
KUPE05   Kuperman, B., et al. "Detection and Prevention of Stack Buffer Overflow
Attacks." Communications of the ACM, November 2005.
LEVY96   Levy, E., "Smashing the Stack for Fun and Profit." Phrack Magazine, File 14,
Issue 49, November 1996.
LHEE03   Lhee, K., and Chapin, S., "Buffer Overflow and Format String Overflow
Vulnerabilities." Software--Practice and Experience, Vol. 33, 2003.
MCHU00   McHugh, J., Christie, A., and Allen, J. "The Role of Intrusion Detection
Systems." IEEE Software, September/October 2000.
NACH97   Nachenberg, C. "Computer Virus-Antivirus Coevolution." Communications
of the ACM, January 1997.
NING04   Ning, P., et al. "Techniques and Tools for Analyzing Intrusion Alerts." ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security, May 2004.
OGOR03   O'Gorman, L. "Comparing Passwords, Tokens and Biometrics for User
Authentication." Proceedings of the IEEE, December 2003.
SAND94   Sandhu, R., and Samarati, P. "Access Control: Principles and Practice."
IEEE Communications Magazine, February 1996.
SAND96   Sandhu, R., et al. "Role-Based Access Control Models." Computer,
September 1994.
SAUN01   Saunders,  G.,  Hitchens,   M.,  and  Varadharajan,  V.      "Role-Based
Access Control and the Access Control Matrix." Operating Systems Review,
October 2001.
SCAR07   Scarfone, K., and Mell, P. Guide to Intrusion Detection and Prevention
Systems. NIST Special Publication SP 800-94, February 2007.
STAL08   Stallings, W., and Brown L. Computer Security: Principles and Practice.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008.

           Recommended Web sites:
                Password usage and generation: NIST documents on this topic
                Biometrics Consortium: Government-sponsored site for the research, testing, and eval-
                 uation of biometric technology
                NIST RBAC site: Includes numerous documents, standards, and software on RBAC
                STAT Project: A research and open source project that focuses on signature-based
                 intrusion detection tools for hosts, applications, and networks
                Snort: Web site for Snort, an open source network intrusion prevention and detection
                 system
                AntiVirus Online: IBM's site on virus information
                VirusList: Site maintained by commercial antivirus software provider. Good collection
                 of useful information
15.8 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms
access control                    discretionary access control      malware
antivirus                               (DAC)                       memory cards
audit records                     hashed passwords                  role-based access control
authentication                    host-based IDS                    (RBAC)
bot                               intrusion detection               rootkit
buffer overflow                   intrusion detections system       smart cards
digital immune system                   (IDS)                       worm
     Review Questions
           15.1  In general terms, what are four means of authenticating a user's identity?
           15.2  Explain the purpose of the salt in Figure 15.1.
           15.3  Explain the difference between a simple memory card and a smart card.
           15.4  List and briefly describe the principal physical characteristics used for biometric
                 identification.
           15.5  Briefly describe the difference between DAC and RBAC.
           15.6  Explain the difference between anomaly intrusion detection and signature intrusion
                 detection.
           15.7  What is a digital immune system?
           15.8  How does behavior-blocking software work?
           15.9  Describe some worm countermeasures.
     15.10       What types of programming languages are vulnerable to buffer overflows?
     15.11       What are the two broad categories of defenses against buffer overflows?
     15.12       List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be
                 used when compiling new programs.
     15.13       List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be
                 implemented when running existing, vulnerable programs.
