Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

Key Terms
access control                    discretionary access control      malware
antivirus                               (DAC)                       memory cards
audit records                     hashed passwords                  role-based access control
authentication                    host-based IDS                    (RBAC)
bot                               intrusion detection               rootkit
buffer overflow                   intrusion detections system       smart cards
digital immune system                   (IDS)                       worm
     Review Questions
           15.1  In general terms, what are four means of authenticating a user's identity?
           15.2  Explain the purpose of the salt in Figure 15.1.
           15.3  Explain the difference between a simple memory card and a smart card.
           15.4  List and briefly describe the principal physical characteristics used for biometric
                 identification.
           15.5  Briefly describe the difference between DAC and RBAC.
           15.6  Explain the difference between anomaly intrusion detection and signature intrusion
                 detection.
           15.7  What is a digital immune system?
           15.8  How does behavior-blocking software work?
           15.9  Describe some worm countermeasures.
     15.10       What types of programming languages are vulnerable to buffer overflows?
     15.11       What are the two broad categories of defenses against buffer overflows?
     15.12       List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be
                 used when compiling new programs.
     15.13       List and briefly describe some of the defenses against buffer overflows that can be
                 implemented when running existing, vulnerable programs.

Problems
15.1  Explain the suitability or unsuitability of the following passwords:
          a. YK 334                                e. Aristotle
          b. mfmitm (for "my favorite              f. tv9stove
                       movie is tender mercies")   g. 12345678
          c. Natalie1                              h. dribgib
          d. Washington
15.2  An early attempt to force users to use less predictable passwords involved computer-
      supplied passwords. The passwords were eight characters long and were taken from
      the character set consisting of lowercase letters and digits. They were generated by a
      pseudorandom number generator with 215 possible starting values. Using the technol-
      ogy of the time, the time required to search through all character strings of length 8
      from a 36-character alphabet was 112 years. Unfortunately, this is not a true reflection
      of the actual security of the system. Explain the problem.
15.3  Assume that passwords are selected from four-character combinations of 26 alpha-
      betic characters. Assume that an adversary is able to attempt passwords at a rate of
      one per second.
      a.  Assuming no feedback to the adversary until each attempt has been completed,
          what is the expected time to discover the correct password?
      b.  Assuming feedback to the adversary flagging an error as each incorrect character
          is entered, what is the expected time to discover the correct password?
15.4  Assume that source elements of length k are mapped in some uniform fashion into a
      target elements of length p. If each digit can take on one of r values, then the number
      of source elements is rk and the number of target elements is the smaller number rp.
      A particular source element xi is mapped to a particular target element yj.
      a.  What is the probability that the correct source element can be selected by an ad-
          versary on one try?
      b.  What is the probability that a different source element xk (xi  xk) that results in
          the same target element, yj, could be produced by an adversary?
      c.  What is the probability that the correct target element can be produced by an
          adversary on one try?
15.5  Assume that passwords are limited to the use of the 95 printable ASCII characters
      and that all passwords are 10 characters in length. Assume a password cracker with
      an encryption rate of 6.4 million encryptions per second. How long will it take to test
      exhaustively all possible passwords on a UNIX system?
15.6  Because of the known risks of the UNIX password system, the SunOS-4.0 documen-
      tation recommends that the password file be removed and replaced with a publicly
      readable file called /etc/publickey. An entry in the file for user A consists of a user's
      identifier IDA, the user's public key, PUa, and the corresponding private key, PRa. This
      private key is encrypted using DES with a key derived from the user's login password
      Pa. When A logs in, the system decrypts E(Pa, PRa) to obtain PRa.
      a.  The system then verifies that Pa was correctly supplied. How?
      b.  How can an opponent attack this system?
15.7  It was stated that the inclusion of the salt in the UNIX password scheme increases the dif-
      ficulty of guessing by a factor of 4096. But the salt is stored in plaintext in the same entry
      as the corresponding ciphertext password. Therefore, those two characters are known to
      the attacker and need not be guessed. Why is it asserted that the salt increases security?
15.8  Assuming that you have successfully answered the preceding problem and under-
      stand the significance of the salt, here is another question. Wouldn't it be possible to
      thwart completely all password crackers by dramatically increasing the salt size to,
      say, 24 or 48 bits?

     15.9   For the DAC model discussed in Section 15.2, an alternative representation of the
            protection state is a directed graph. Each subject and each object in the protection
            state is represented by a node (a single node is used for an entity that is both subject
            and object). A directed line from a subject to an object indicates an access right, and
            the label on the link defines the access right.
            a.  Draw a directed graph that corresponds to the access matrix of Figure 12.15a.
            b.  Draw a directed graph that corresponds to the access matrix of Figure 15.4.
            c.  Is there a one-to-one correspondence between the directed graph representation
                and the access matrix representation? Explain.
     15.10  UNIX treats file directories in the same fashion as files; that is, both are defined by
            the same type of data structure, called an inode. As with files, directories include a
            9-bit protection string. If care is not taken, this can create access control problems. For
            example, consider a file with protection mode 644 (octal) contained in a directory with
            protection mode 730. How might the file be compromised in this case?
     15.11  In the traditional UNIX file access model, UNIX systems provide a default setting for
            newly created files and directories, which the owner may later change.The default is typ-
            ically full access for the owner combined with one of the following: no access for group
            and other, read/execute access for group and none for other, or read/execute access for
            both group and other. Briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each of these
            cases, including an example of a type of organization where each would be appropriate.
     15.12  Consider user accounts on a system with a Web server configured to provide access to
            user Web areas. In general, this scheme uses a standard directory name, such as public_
            html, in a user's home directory. This acts as the user's Web area if it exists. However,
            to allow the Web server to access the pages in this directory, it must have at least search
            (execute) access to the user's home directory, read/execute access to the Web directory,
            and read access to any Web pages in it. Consider the interaction of this requirement
            with the cases you discussed for the preceding problem. What consequences does this
            requirement have? Note that a Web server typically executes as a special user, and in a
            group that is not shared with most users on the system. Are there some circumstances
            when running such a Web service is simply not appropriate? Explain.
     15.13  Assume a system with N job positions. For job position i, the number of individual users
            in that position is Ui and the number of permissions required for the job position is Pi.
            a.  For a traditional DAC scheme, how many relationships between users and permis-
                sions must be defined?
            b.  For a RBAC scheme, how many relationships between users and permissions must
                be defined?
     15.14  In the context of an IDS, we define a false positive to be an alarm generated by an IDS
            in which the IDS alerts to a condition that is actually benign. A false negative occurs
            when an IDS fails to generate an alarm when an alert-worthy condition is in effect.
            Using the following diagram, depict two curves that roughly indicate false positives
            and false negatives, respectively.
                              Frequency
                              of alerts
                              Less specific     Conservativeness  More specific
                              or looser         of signatures     or stricter
     15.15  Rewrite the function shown in Figure 7.13a so that it is no longer vulnerable to a stack
            buffer overflow.

                                      CHAPTER
