Distributed Processing, Client/Server, and Clusters
                                      CHAPTER
DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING,
CLIENT/SERVER, AND CLUSTERS
16.1   Client/Server Computing
       What Is Client/Server Computing?
       Client/Server Applications
       Middleware
16.2   Service-Oriented Architecture
16.3   Distributed Message Passing
       Reliability versus Unreliability
       Blocking versus Nonblocking
16.4   Remote Procedure Calls
       Parameter Passing
       Parameter Representation
       Client/Server Binding
       Synchronous versus Asynchronous
       Object-Oriented Mechanisms
16.5   Clusters
       Cluster Configurations
       Operating System Design Issues
       Cluster Computer Architecture
       Clusters Compared to SMP
16.6   Windows Cluster Server
16.7   Beowulf and Linux Clusters
       Beowulf Features
       Beowulf Software
16.8   Summary
16.9   Recommended Reading and Web Sites
16.10  Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems
                                                  677

         The reader who has persevered thus far in this account will realize the
         difficulties that were coped with, the hazards that were encountered,
         the mistakes that were made, and the work that was done.
                                                --THE WORLD CRISIS, Winston Churchill
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
        Present a summary of the key aspects of client/server computing.
        Define service-oriented architecture.
        Understand the principle design issues for distributed message passing.
        Understand the principle design issues for remote procedure calls.
        Understand the principle design issues for clusters.
        Describe the cluster mechanisms in Windows 7 and Beowulf.
      In this chapter, we begin with an examination of some of the key concepts in distributed
      software, including client/server architecture, message passing, and remote procedure
      calls. Then we examine the increasingly important cluster architecture.
         Chapters 17 and 18 complete our discussion of distributed systems.
16.1  CLIENT/SERVER COMPUTING
      The concept of client/server computing, and related concepts, has become increas-
      ingly important in information technology systems. This section begins with a
      description of the general nature of client/server computing. This is followed by a
      discussion of alternative ways of organizing the client/server functions. The issue of
      file cache consistency, raised by the use of file servers, is then examined. Finally, this
      section introduces the concept of middleware.
      What Is Client/Server Computing?
      As with other new waves in the computer field, client/server computing comes with
      its own set of jargon words. Table 16.1 lists some of the terms that are commonly
      found in descriptions of client/server products and applications.
         Figure 16.1 attempts to capture the essence of the client/server concept. As the
      term suggests, a client/server environment is populated by clients and servers. The
      client machines are generally single-user PCs or workstations that provide a highly
      user-friendly interface to the end user. The client-based station generally presents
      the type of graphical interface that is most comfortable to users, including the use
      of windows and a mouse. Microsoft Windows and Macintosh OS provide examples
      of such interfaces. Client-based applications are tailored for ease of use and include
      such familiar tools as the spreadsheet.
         Each server in the client/server environment provides a set of shared services
      to the clients. The most common type of server currently is the database server,
