Operating System Objectives and Functions

     An OS is a program that controls the execution of application programs and acts as
     an interface between applications and the computer hardware. It can be thought of
     as having three objectives:
     ·  Convenience: An OS makes a computer more convenient to use.
     ·  Efficiency: An OS allows the computer system resources to be used in an effi-
        cient manner.
     ·  Ability to evolve: An OS should be constructed in such a way as to permit the
        effective development, testing, and introduction of new system functions with-
        out interfering with service.
        Let us examine these three aspects of an OS in turn.
     The Operating System as a User/Computer Interface
     The hardware and software used in providing applications to a user can be viewed
     in a layered or hierarchical fashion, as depicted in Figure 2.1. The user of those
     applications, the end user, generally is not concerned with the details of computer
     hardware. Thus, the end user views a computer system in terms of a set of applica-
     tions. An application can be expressed in a programming language and is developed
     by an application programmer. If one were to develop an application program as a
     set of machine instructions that is completely responsible for controlling the com-
     puter hardware, one would be faced with an overwhelmingly complex undertaking.
     To ease this chore, a set of system programs is provided. Some of these programs
     are referred to as utilities, or library programs. These implement frequently used
     functions that assist in program creation, the management of files, and the control of
        Application                         Application programs
     programming interface
        Application                         Libraries/utilities                Software
        binary interface
                                            Operating system
        Instruction set
        architecture
                                       Execution hardware
                                       System interconnect        Memory
                                                    (bus)         translation  Hardware
                                       I/O devices                Main
                                       and                        memory
                                       networking
     Figure 2.1  Computer   Hardware and Software Structure

I/O devices. A programmer will make use of these facilities in developing an appli-
cation, and the application, while it is running, will invoke the utilities to perform
certain functions. The most important collection of system programs comprises the
OS. The OS masks the details of the hardware from the programmer and provides
the programmer with a convenient interface for using the system. It acts as media-
tor, making it easier for the programmer and for application programs to access and
use those facilities and services.
   Briefly, the OS typically provides services in the following areas:
·  Program development: The OS provides a variety of facilities and services,
   such as editors and debuggers, to assist the programmer in creating programs.
   Typically, these services are in the form of utility programs that, while not
   strictly part of the core of the OS, are supplied with the OS and are referred to
   as application program development tools.
·  Program execution: A number of steps need to be performed to execute a
   program. Instructions and data must be loaded into main memory, I/O devices
   and files must be initialized, and other resources must be prepared. The OS
   handles these scheduling duties for the user.
·  Access to I/O devices: Each I/O device requires its own peculiar set of instruc-
   tions or control signals for operation. The OS provides a uniform interface
   that hides these details so that programmers can access such devices using sim-
   ple reads and writes.
·  Controlled access to files: For file access, the OS must reflect a detailed under-
   standing of not only the nature of the I/O device (disk drive, tape drive) but
   also the structure of the data contained in the files on the storage medium.
   In the case of a system with multiple users, the OS may provide protection
   mechanisms to control access to the files.
·  System access: For shared or public systems, the OS controls access to the
   system as a whole and to specific system resources. The access function must
   provide protection of resources and data from unauthorized users and must
   resolve conflicts for resource contention.
·  Error detection and response: A variety of errors can occur while a computer
   system is running. These include internal and external hardware errors, such
   as a memory error, or a device failure or malfunction; and various software
   errors, such as division by zero, attempt to access forbidden memory location,
   and inability of the OS to grant the request of an application. In each case,
   the OS must provide a response that clears the error condition with the least
   impact on running applications. The response may range from ending the pro-
   gram that caused the error, to retrying the operation, to simply reporting the
   error to the application.
·  Accounting: A good OS will collect usage statistics for various resources and
   monitor performance parameters such as response time. On any system, this
   information is useful in anticipating the need for future enhancements and in
   tuning the system to improve performance. On a multiuser system, the infor-
   mation can be used for billing purposes.

       Figure 2.1 also indicates three key interfaces in a typical computer system:
    ·  Instruction set architecture (ISA): The ISA defines the repertoire of machine
       language instructions that a computer can follow. This interface is the bound-
       ary between hardware and software. Note that both application programs
       and utilities may access the ISA directly. For these programs, a subset of the
       instruction repertoire is available (user ISA). The OS has access to additional
       machine language instructions that deal with managing system resources
       (system ISA).
    ·  Application binary interface (ABI): The ABI defines a standard for binary
       portability across programs. The ABI defines the system call interface to
       the operating system and the hardware resources and services available in a
       system through the user ISA.
    ·  Application programming interface (API): The API gives a program access
       to the hardware resources and services available in a system through the user
       ISA supplemented with high-level language (HLL) library calls. Any system
       calls are usually performed through libraries. Using an API enables applica-
       tion software to be ported easily, through recompilation, to other systems that
       support the same API.
    The Operating System as Resource Manager
    A computer is a set of resources for the movement, storage, and processing of data
    and for the control of these functions. The OS is responsible for managing these
    resources.
       Can we say that it is the OS that controls the movement, storage, and process-
    ing of data? From one point of view, the answer is yes: By managing the computer's
    resources, the OS is in control of the computer's basic functions. But this control is
    exercised in a curious way. Normally, we think of a control mechanism as something
    external to that which is controlled, or at least as something that is a distinct and
    separate part of that which is controlled. (For example, a residential heating sys-
    tem is controlled by a thermostat, which is separate from the heat-generation and
    heat-distribution apparatus.) This is not the case with the OS, which as a control
    mechanism is unusual in two respects:
    ·  The OS functions in the same way as ordinary computer software; that is, it is
       a program or suite of programs executed by the processor.
    ·  The OS frequently relinquishes control and must depend on the processor to
       allow it to regain control.
       Like other computer programs, the OS provides instructions for the proces-
    sor. The key difference is in the intent of the program. The OS directs the processor
    in the use of the other system resources and in the timing of its execution of other
    programs. But in order for the processor to do any of these things, it must cease
    executing the OS program and execute other programs. Thus, the OS relinquishes
    control for the processor to do some "useful" work and then resumes control long
    enough to prepare the processor to do the next piece of work. The mechanisms
    involved in all this should become clear as the chapter proceeds.

              Computer system
   Memory                                                  I/O devices
   Operating  I/O controller                                                                  Printers,
   system                                                                                     keyboards,
   software                                                                                   digital camera,
              I/O controller                                                                  etc.
   Programs
   and data
              I/O controller
   Processor                   Processor
                                                           Storage
                                                           OS
                                                           Programs
                                                           Data
Figure 2.2  The Operating System as Resource Manager
   Figure 2.2 suggests the main resources that are managed by the OS. A portion
of the OS is in main memory. This includes the kernel, or nucleus, which contains
the most frequently used functions in the OS and, at a given time, other portions
of the OS currently in use. The remainder of main memory contains user programs
and data. The memory management hardware in the processor and the OS jointly
control the allocation of main memory, as we shall see. The OS decides when an I/O
device can be used by a program in execution and controls access to and use of files.
The processor itself is a resource, and the OS must determine how much processor
time is to be devoted to the execution of a particular user program. In the case of a
multiple-processor system, this decision must span all of the processors.
Ease of Evolution of an Operating System
A major OS will evolve over time for a number of reasons:
·  Hardware upgrades plus new types of hardware: For example, early versions
   of UNIX and the Macintosh OS did not employ a paging mechanism because
   they were run on processors without paging hardware.1 Subsequent versions
   of these operating systems were modified to exploit paging capabilities. Also,
1Paging is introduced briefly later in this chapter and is discussed in detail in Chapter 7.

        the use of graphics terminals and page-mode terminals instead of line-at-a-
        time scroll mode terminals affects OS design. For example, a graphics terminal
        typically allows the user to view several applications at the same time through
        "windows" on the screen. This requires more sophisticated support in the OS.
     ·  New services: In response to user demand or in response to the needs of sys-
        tem managers, the OS expands to offer new services. For example, if it is found
        to be difficult to maintain good performance for users with existing tools, new
        measurement and control tools may be added to the OS.
     ·  Fixes: Any OS has faults. These are discovered over the course of time and
        fixes are made. Of course, the fix may introduce new faults.
        The need to change an OS regularly places certain requirements on its design.
     An obvious statement is that the system should be modular in construction, with
     clearly defined interfaces between the modules, and that it should be well docu-
     mented. For large programs, such as the typical contemporary OS, what might be
     referred to as straightforward modularization is inadequate [DENN80a]. That is,
     much more must be done than simply partitioning a program into modules. We
     return to this topic later in this chapter.
