Client/Server Computing

      The concept of client/server computing, and related concepts, has become increas-
      ingly important in information technology systems. This section begins with a
      description of the general nature of client/server computing. This is followed by a
      discussion of alternative ways of organizing the client/server functions. The issue of
      file cache consistency, raised by the use of file servers, is then examined. Finally, this
      section introduces the concept of middleware.
      What Is Client/Server Computing?
      As with other new waves in the computer field, client/server computing comes with
      its own set of jargon words. Table 16.1 lists some of the terms that are commonly
      found in descriptions of client/server products and applications.
         Figure 16.1 attempts to capture the essence of the client/server concept. As the
      term suggests, a client/server environment is populated by clients and servers. The
      client machines are generally single-user PCs or workstations that provide a highly
      user-friendly interface to the end user. The client-based station generally presents
      the type of graphical interface that is most comfortable to users, including the use
      of windows and a mouse. Microsoft Windows and Macintosh OS provide examples
      of such interfaces. Client-based applications are tailored for ease of use and include
      such familiar tools as the spreadsheet.
         Each server in the client/server environment provides a set of shared services
      to the clients. The most common type of server currently is the database server,

Table 16.1  Client/Server Terminology
Applications Programming Interface (API)
A set of function and call programs that allow clients and servers to intercommunicate
Client
A networked information requester, usually a PC or workstation, that can query database and/or other
information from a server
Middleware
A set of drivers, APIs, or other software that improves connectivity between a client application and a server
Relational Database
A database in which information access is limited to the selection of rows that satisfy all search criteria
Server
A computer, usually a high-powered workstation, a minicomputer, or a mainframe, that houses information
for manipulation by networked clients
Structured Query Language (SQL)
A language developed by IBM and standardized by ANSI for addressing, creating, updating, or querying
relational databases
        usually controlling a relational database. The server enables many clients to share
        access to the same database and enables the use of a high-performance computer
        system to manage the database.
            In addition to clients and servers, the third essential ingredient of the client/
        server environment is the network. Client/server computing is typically distributed
        computing. Users, applications, and resources are distributed in response to business
        requirements and linked by a single LAN or WAN or by an internet of networks.
                                                 LAN or WAN
                                                 or Internet
                                                                                        Server
                                    Workstation
                                       (client)
                      Figure  16.1     Generic   Client/Server Environment

        How does a client/server configuration differ from any other distributed
     processing solution? There are a number of characteristics that stand out and that,
     together, make client/server distinct from other types of distributed processing:
     ·  There is a heavy reliance on bringing user-friendly applications to the user
        on his or her own system. This gives the user a great deal of control over the
        timing and style of computer usage and gives department-level managers the
        ability to be responsive to their local needs.
     ·  Although applications are dispersed, there is an emphasis on centralizing cor-
        porate databases and many network management and utility functions. This
        enables corporate management to maintain overall control of the total capital
        investment in computing and information systems and to provide interoper-
        ability so that systems are tied together. At the same time it relieves individual
        departments and divisions of much of the overhead of maintaining sophis-
        ticated computer-based facilities but enables them to choose just about any
        type of machine and interface they need to access data and information.
     ·  There is a commitment, both by user organizations and vendors, to open and
        modular systems. This means that the user has more choice in selecting prod-
        ucts and in mixing equipment from a number of vendors.
     ·  Networking is fundamental to the operation. Thus, network management and
        network security have a high priority in organizing and operating information
        systems.
     Client/Server Applications
     The key feature of a client/server architecture is the allocation of application-level tasks
     between clients and servers. Figure 16.2 illustrates the general case. In both client and
     server, of course, the basic software is an operating system running on the hardware
     platform. The platforms and the operating systems of client and server may differ.
     Indeed, there may be a number of different types of client platforms and operating
                  Client workstation
                  Presentation services                 Server
                                         Request
                  Application logic                     Application logic
                  (client portion)       Response       (server portion)
                  Communications                        Communications
                  software               Protocol       software
                                         interaction
                  Client                                Server
                  operating system                      operating system
                  Hardware platform                     Hardware platform
                  Figure 16.2  Generic Client/Server Architecture

systems and a number of different types of server platforms in a single environment.
As long as a particular client and server share the same communications protocols and
support the same applications, these lower-level differences are irrelevant.
It is the communications software that enables client and server to interoper-
ate. The principal example of such software is TCP/IP. Of course, the point of all of
this support software (communications and operating system) is to provide a base
for distributed applications. Ideally, the actual functions performed by the applica-
tion can be split up between client and server in a way that optimizes the use of
resources. In some cases, depending on the application needs, the bulk of the appli-
cations software executes at the server, while in other cases, most of the application
logic is located at the client.
An essential factor in the success of a client/server environment is the way
in which the user interacts with the system as a whole. Thus, the design of the user
interface on the client machine is critical. In most client/server systems, there is
heavy emphasis on providing a graphical user interface (GUI) that is easy to use,
easy to learn, yet powerful and flexible. Thus, we can think of a presentation serv-
ices module in the client workstation that is responsible for providing a user-friendly
interface to the distributed applications available in the environment.
DATABASE APPLICATIONS            As an example that illustrates the concept of splitting
application logic between client and server, let us consider one of the most common
families of client/server applications: those that use relational databases. In this
environment, the server is essentially a database server. Interaction between client
and server is in the form of transactions in which the client makes a database request
and receives a database response.
Figure 16.3 illustrates, in general terms, the architecture of such a system. The
server is responsible for maintaining the database, for which purpose a complex
Client workstation
Presentation services
Application logic                                   Server
                       Request
Database logic                                Database logic
                       Response
Communications                      Communications  Database management
software               Protocol     software                       system
                       interaction
Client                              Server operating system
operating system
Hardware platform                   Hardware platform
Figure 16.3  Client/Server Architecture for Database Applications

     database management system software module is required. A variety of different
     applications that make use of the database can be housed on client machines. The
     "glue" that ties client and server together is software that enables the client to make
     requests for access to the server's database. A popular example of such logic is the
     structured query language (SQL).
     Figure 16.3 suggests that all of the application logic--the software for "number
     crunching" or other types of data analysis--is on the client side, while the server is
     only concerned with managing the database. Whether such a configuration is appro-
     priate depends on the style and intent of the application. For example, suppose that
     the primary purpose is to provide online access for record lookup. Figure 16.4a sug-
     gests how this might work. Suppose that the server is maintaining a database of 1
     million records (called rows in relational database terminology), and the user wants
     to perform a lookup that should result in zero, one, or at most a few records. The
     user could search for these records using a number of search criteria (e.g., records
     older than 1992, records referring to individuals in Ohio, records referring to a spe-
     cific event or characteristic, etc.). An initial client query may yield a server response
     that there are 100,000 records that satisfy the search criteria. The user then adds
     additional qualifiers and issues a new query. This time, a response indicating that
     there are 1,000 possible records is returned. Finally, the client issues a third request
     with additional qualifiers. The resulting search criteria yield a single match, and the
     record is returned to the client.
                                        Initial query
     Client       100,000 possible records                Server
                                        Next query
                  1,000 possible records
                                        Final query
                  One record returned                             1,000,000
                                                                  record
                                                                  database
                  (a) Desirable client/server use
     Client
                                        Query             Server
                  300,000               records returned
                                                                  1,000,000
                                                                  record
                                                                  database
                  (b) Misused client/server
     Figure 16.4  Client/Server Database Usage

    The preceding application is well suited to a client/server architecture for two
reasons:
1.  There is a massive job of sorting and searching the database. This requires
    a large disk or bank of disks, a high-speed CPU, and a high-speed I/O archi-
    tecture. Such capacity and power is not needed and is too expensive for a
    single-user workstation or PC.
2.  It would place too great a traffic burden on the network to move the entire
    1-million record file to the client for searching. Therefore, it is not enough for
    the server just to be able to retrieve records on behalf of a client; the server
    needs to have database logic that enables it to perform searches on behalf of
    a client.
    Now consider the scenario of Figure 16.4b, which has the same 1-million-
record database. In this case, a single query results in the transmission of 300,000
records over the network. This might happen if, for example, the user wishes to find
the grand total or mean value of some field across many records or even the entire
database.
    Clearly, this latter scenario is unacceptable. One solution to this problem,
which maintains the client/server architecture with all of its benefits, is to move
part of the application logic over to the server. That is, the server can be equipped
with application logic for performing data analysis as well as data retrieval and data
searching.
CLASSES     OF  CLIENT/SERVER  APPLICATIONS      Within the general framework of
client/server, there is a spectrum of implementations that divide the work between
client and server differently. Figure 16.5 illustrates in general terms some of the
major options for database applications. Other splits are possible, and the options
may have a different characterization for other types of applications. In any case, it
is useful to examine this figure to get a feel for the kind of trade-offs possible.
    Figure 16.5 depicts four classes:
·   Host-based processing: Host-based processing is not true client/server comput-
    ing as the term is generally used. Rather, host-based processing refers to the
    traditional mainframe environment in which all or virtually all of the process-
    ing is done on a central host. Often the user interface is via a dumb terminal.
    Even if the user is employing a microcomputer, the user's station is generally
    limited to the role of a terminal emulator.
·   Server-based processing: The most basic class of client/server configuration
    is one in which the client is principally responsible for providing a graphical
    user interface, while virtually all of the processing is done on the server. This
    configuration is typical of early client/server efforts, especially departmental-
    level systems. The rationale behind such configurations is that the user work-
    station is best suited to providing a user-friendly interface and that databases
    and applications can easily be maintained on central systems. Although the
    user gains the advantage of a better interface, this type of configuration does
    not generally lend itself to any significant gains in productivity or to any funda-
    mental changes in the actual business functions that the system supports.

                     Client              Server
                                         Presentation logic
                                         Application logic
                                         Database logic
                                         DBMS
                     (a) Host-based processing
                     Presentation logic
                                         Application logic
                                         Database logic
                                         DBMS
                     (b) Server-based processing
                     Presentation logic
                     Application logic   Application logic
                                         Database logic
                                         DBMS
                     (c) Cooperative processing
                     Presentation logic
                     Application logic
                     Database logic      Database logic
                                         DBMS
                     (d) Client-based processing
                     Figure 16.5  Classes of Client/Server Applications
     ·  Client-based processing: At the other extreme, virtually all application
        processing may be done at the client, with the exception of data validation
        routines and other database logic functions that are best performed at the
        server. Generally, some of the more sophisticated database logic functions
        are housed on the client side. This architecture is perhaps the most common
        client/server approach in current use. It enables the user to employ applica-
        tions tailored to local needs.
     ·  Cooperative processing: In a cooperative processing configuration, the
        application processing is performed in an optimized fashion, taking advantage
        of the strengths of both client and server machines and of the distribution of
        data. Such a configuration is more complex to set up and maintain but, in the
        long run, this type of configuration may offer greater user productivity gains
        and greater network efficiency than other client/server approaches.
        Figures 16.5c and 16.5d correspond to configurations in which a considerable
     fraction of the load is on the client. This so-called fat client model has been popu-
     larized by application development tools such as Sybase Inc.'s PowerBuilder and
     Gupta Corp.'s SQL Windows. Applications developed with these tools are typically
     departmental in scope, supporting between 25 and 150 users [ECKE95]. The main

benefit of the fat client model is that it takes advantage of desktop power, offload-
ing application processing from servers and making them more efficient and less
likely to be bottlenecks.
There are, however, several disadvantages to the fat client strategy. The addi-
tion of more functions rapidly overloads the capacity of desktop machines, forcing
companies to upgrade. If the model extends beyond the department to incorporate
many users, the company must install high-capacity LANs to support the large
volumes of transmission between the thin servers and the fat clients. Finally, it is
difficult to maintain, upgrade, or replace applications distributed across tens or
hundreds of desktops.
Figure 16.5b is representative of a thin client approach. This approach more
nearly mimics the traditional host-centered approach and is often the migration
path for evolving corporate-wide applications from the mainframe to a distributed
environment.
THREE-TIER    CLIENT/SERVER  ARCHITECTURE  The                traditional  client/server
architecture involves two levels, or tiers: a client tier and a server tier. A three-
tier architecture is also common (Figure 16.6). In this architecture, the application
software is distributed among three types of machines: a user machine, a middle-tier
server, and a backend server. The user machine is the client machine we have been
discussing and, in the three-tier model, is typically a thin client. The middle-tier
machines are essentially gateways between the thin user clients and a variety of
                             Client
                             Middle-tier server
                             (application server)
                             Back-end servers
                             (data servers)
Figure 16.6            Three-Tier Client/Server Architecture

     backend database servers. The middle-tier machines can convert protocols and map
     from one type of database query to another. In addition, the middle-tier machine
     can merge/integrate results from different data sources. Finally, the middle-tier
     machine can serve as a gateway between the desktop applications and the backend
     legacy applications by mediating between the two worlds.
     The interaction between the middle-tier server and the backend server also
     follows the client/server model. Thus, the middle-tier system acts as both a client
     and a server.
     FILE CACHE CONSISTENCY  When a file server is used, performance of file I/O can
     be noticeably degraded relative to local file access because of the delays imposed
     by the network. To reduce this performance penalty, individual systems can use file
     caches to hold recently accessed file records. Because of the principle of locality, use
     of a local file cache should reduce the number of remote server accesses that must
     be made.
     Figure 16.7 illustrates a typical distributed mechanism for caching files among
     a networked collection of workstations. When a process makes a file access, the
     request is presented first to the cache of the process's workstation ("file traffic"). If
     not satisfied there, the request is passed either to the local disk, if the file is stored
     there ("disk traffic"), or to a file server, where the file is stored ("server traffic").
     At the server, the server's cache is first interrogated and, if there is a miss, then the
     server's disk is accessed. The dual caching approach is used to reduce communica-
     tions traffic (client cache) and disk I/O (server cache).
     When caches always contain exact copies of remote data, we say that the caches
     are consistent. It is possible for caches to become inconsistent when the remote data
     are changed and the corresponding obsolete local cache copies are not discarded.
     This can happen if one client modifies a file that is also cached by other clients. The
     difficulty is actually at two levels. If a client adopts a policy of immediately writing
                                      Network
     File                    Server                      Server                  File
     traffic        Client   traffic  Server             traffic  Client         traffic
                    cache             cache                       cache
                                             Disk                         Disk
                                            traffic                     traffic
                                      Server                      Client
                                      disk                        disk
     Figure 16.7    Distributed File Cacheing in Sprite

any changes to a file back to the server, then any other client that has a cache copy
of the relevant portion of the file will have obsolete data. The problem is made even
worse if the client delays writing back changes to the server. In that case, the server
itself has an obsolete version of the file, and new file read requests to the server
might obtain obsolete data. The problem of keeping local cache copies up to date to
changes in remote data is known as the cache consistency problem.
The simplest approach to cache consistency is to use file-locking techniques to
prevent simultaneous access to a file by more than one client. This guarantees con-
sistency at the expense of performance and flexibility. A more powerful approach
is provided with the facility in Sprite [NELS88, OUST88]. Any number of remote
processes may open a file for read and create their own client cache. But when an
open file request to a server requests write access and other processes have the file
open for read access, the server takes two actions. First, it notifies the writing process
that, although it may maintain a cache, it must write back all altered blocks immedi-
ately upon update. There can be at most one such client. Second, the server notifies
all reading processes that have the file open that the file is no longer cacheable.
Middleware
The development and deployment of client/server products has far outstripped
efforts to standardize all aspects of distributed computing, from the physical layer
up to the application layer. This lack of standards makes it difficult to implement an
integrated, multivendor, enterprise-wide client/server configuration. Because much
of the benefit of the client/server approach is tied up with its modularity and the
ability to mix and match platforms and applications to provide a business solution,
this interoperability problem must be solved.
To achieve the true benefits of the client/server approach, developers must
have a set of tools that provide a uniform means and style of access to system
resources across all platforms. This will enable programmers to build applications
that not only look and feel the same on various PCs and workstations but that use
the same method to access data regardless of the location of that data.
The most common way to meet this requirement is by the use of standard
programming interfaces and protocols that sit between the application above and
communications software and operating system below. Such standardized interfaces
and protocols have come to be referred to as middleware. With standard program-
ming interfaces, it is easy to implement the same application on a variety of server
types and workstation types. This obviously benefits the customer, but vendors are
also motivated to provide such interfaces. The reason is that customers buy appli-
cations, not servers; customers will only choose among those server products that
run the applications they want. The standardized protocols are needed to link these
various server interfaces back to the clients that need access to them.
There is a variety of middleware packages ranging from the very simple to the
very complex. What they all have in common is the capability to hide the complexi-
ties and disparities of different network protocols and operating systems. Client and
server vendors generally provide a number of the more popular middleware pack-
ages as options. Thus, a user can settle on a particular middleware strategy and then
assemble equipment from various vendors that support that strategy.

     MIDDLEWARE ARCHITECTURE               Figure 16.8 suggests the role of middleware in a
     client/server architecture. The exact role of the middleware component will depend
     on the style of client/server computing being used. Referring back to Figure 16.5,
     recall that there are a number of different client/server approaches, depending on
     the way in which application functions are split up. In any case, Figure 16.8 gives a
     good general idea of the architecture involved.
     Note that there is both a client and server component of middleware. The
     basic purpose of middleware is to enable an application or user at a client to access
     a variety of services on servers without being concerned about differences among
     servers. To look at one specific application area, the structured query language
     (SQL) is supposed to provide a standardized means for access to a relational data-
     base by either a local or remote user or application. However, many relational
     database vendors, although they support SQL, have added their own proprietary
     extensions to SQL. This enables vendors to differentiate their products but also
     creates potential incompatibilities.
     As an example, consider a distributed system used to support, among other
     things, the personnel department. The basic employee data, such as employee name
     and address, might be stored on a Gupta database, whereas salary information
     might be contained on an Oracle database. When a user in the personnel depart-
     ment requires access to particular records, that user does not want to be concerned
     with which vendor's database contains the records needed. Middleware provides a
     layer of software that enables uniform access to these differing systems.
     It is instructive to look at the role of middleware from a logical, rather than
     an implementation, point of view. This viewpoint is illustrated in Figure 16.9.
     Middleware enables the realization of the promise of distributed client/server com-
     puting. The entire distributed system can be viewed as a set of applications and
     resources available to users. Users need not be concerned with the location of data
     Client workstation
     Presentation services
     Application logic                                          Server
     Middleware             Middleware                          Middleware
                            interaction
     Communications                        Communications                   Application
     software               Protocol                  software              services
                            interaction
     Client                                           Server operating system
     operating system
     Hardware platform                                Hardware platform
     Figure 16.8  The Role  of Middleware  in Client/Server Architecture

      Application                                               Application
                      APIs
                      Middleware
                      (distributed system services)
                      Platform interfaces
      Platform:                                                 Platform:
      OS                                                        OS
      Hardware                                                  Hardware
      Figure 16.9     Logical View of Middleware
      or indeed the location of applications. All applications operate over a uniform
      applications programming interface (API). The middleware, which cuts across all
      client and server platforms, is responsible for routing client requests to the appro-
      priate server.
      Although there is a wide variety of middleware products, these products are
      typically based on one of two underlying mechanisms: message passing or remote
      procedure calls. These two methods are examined in the next two sections.
