Service-Oriented Architecture

      The service-oriented architecture (SOA) is a form of client/server architecture
      that now enjoys widespread use in enterprise systems. An SOA organizes business
      functions into a modular structure rather than as monolithic applications for each
      department. As a result, common functions can be used by different departments
      internally and by external business partners as well. The more fine-grained the
      modules, the more they can be reused. In general, an SOA consists of a set of
      services and a set of client applications that use these services. A client request may
      involve a single service or may involve two or more services to coordinating some
      activity, requiring communication of services with each other. The services are
      available through published and discoverable interfaces.
      Standardized interfaces are used to enable service modules to communicate
      with one another and to enable client applications to communicate with service mod-
      ules. The most popular interface is the use of XML (Extensible Markup Language)

     over HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol), known as Web services. SOAs are also
     implemented using other standards, such as CORBA (Common Object Request
     Broker Architecture).
        At a top level, an SOA contains three types of architectural elements [BIH06],
     illustrated in Figure 16.10:
     ·  Service provider: A network node that provides a service interface for a soft-
        ware asset that manages a specific set of tasks. A service provider node can
        represent the services of a business entity, or it can simply represent the service
        interface for a reusable subsystem.
     ·  Service requestor: A network node that discovers and invokes other soft-
        ware services to provide a business solution. Service requestor nodes will
        often represent a business application component that performs remote
        procedure calls to a distributed object, the service provider. In some cases,
        the provider node may reside locally within an intranet or in other cases
        it could reside remotely over the Internet. The conceptual nature of SOA
        leaves the networking, transport protocol, and security details to the specific
        implementation.
     ·  Service broker: A specific kind of service provider that acts as a registry and
        allows for the lookup of service provider interfaces and service locations. The
        service broker can pass on service requests to one or more additional service
        providers.
        [BROW03] lists the following as key characteristics for effective use of services:
     ·  Coarse-grained: Operations on services are frequently implemented to
        encompass more functionality and operate on larger data sets, compared with
        component-interface design.
     ·  Interface-based design: Services implement separately defined interfaces. The
        benefit of this is that multiple services can implement a common interface and
        a service can implement multiple interfaces.
                                                   proviSedrervice
                                   sePruvibcliesh           Bintodscelrivenicte
                    broSkeerrvice                  Find                          requeSsetrevrice
                                                   service
                    Figure 16.10   SOA Model

      · Discoverable: Services need to be found at both design time and run time, not
         only by unique identity but also by interface identity and by service kind.
      ·  Single instance: Unlike component-based development, which instantiates
         components as needed, each service is a single, always running instance that a
         number of clients communicate with.
      ·  Loosely coupled: Services are connected to other services and clients using
         standard, dependency-reducing, decoupled message-based methods such as
         XML document exchanges.
      ·  Asynchronous: In general, services use an asynchronous message-passing
         approach; however, this is not required. In fact, many services will use syn-
         chronous message passing at times.
         To give the reader some feel for the use of SOA, we look at an example. Figure
      16.11a shows a common approach to building applications targeted at specific user
      categories. For each specific application, a single self-contained application module
      is built. What ties together the various applications in the enterprise is an applica-
      tion-independent database management system that supports a number of databases.
      Multiple applications may have access to a single database. For example, in this
      configuration all three applications require access to a customer information data-
      base. The advantages of this arrangement are clear. By separating the data from the
      applications and providing a uniform database interface, multiple applications can
      be developed and revised independently from one another.
         This typical approach, of a variety of applications using a common set of data-
      bases, has some drawbacks. The addition of a new feature or user service, such as
      ATM, generally requires building a new application independent of existing appli-
      cations. This is despite the fact that much of the necessary logic has already been
      implemented in related applications.
         We can achieve greater efficiency and flexibility by migrating to an SOA, as
      shown in Figure 16.11b. Here, the strategy is to isolate services that may be of com-
      mon use to multiple applications and implement these as separate service modules.
      In this particular example of the SOA, there are some core applications that deal
      with the functionality of individual databases. These applications are accessible by
      application programming interfaces by service modules that implement common
      services. Finally, the specific applications visible to users deal primarily with presen-
      tation issues and with specific business logic.
