Windows Cluster Server

     Windows Failover Clustering is a shared-nothing cluster, in which each disk volume
     and other resources are owned by a single system at a time.
        The Windows cluster design makes use of the following concepts:
       Cluster Service: The collection of software on each node that manages all
        cluster-specific activity.
       Resource: An item managed by the cluster service. All resources are objects
        representing actual resources in the system, including hardware devices such

   as disk drives and network cards and logical items such as logical disk volumes,
   TCP/IP addresses, entire applications, and databases.
  Online: A resource is said to be online at a node when it is providing service
   on that specific node.
  Group: A collection of resources managed as a single unit. Usually, a group
   contains all of the elements needed to run a specific application and for client
   systems to connect to the service provided by that application.
   The concept of group is of particular importance. A group combines resources
into larger units that are easily managed, both for failover and load balancing.
Operations performed on a group, such as transferring the group to another node,
automatically affect all of the resources in that group. Resources are implemented
as dynamically linked libraries (DLLs) and managed by a resource monitor. The
resource monitor interacts with the cluster service via remote procedure calls and
responds to cluster service commands to configure and move resource groups.
   Figure 16.17 depicts the Windows clustering components and their relation-
ships in a single system of a cluster. The node manager is responsible for maintain-
ing this node's membership in the cluster. Periodically, it sends heartbeat messages
to the node managers on other nodes in the cluster. In the event that one node man-
ager detects a loss of heartbeat messages from another cluster node, it broadcasts a
                                              Cluster management tools
                                              Cluster API DLL
                                              RPC
                                                                        Cluster
                                              Global update             service
                           Database           manager
                           manager                                Node
                                              Event processor  manager
        App                Failover mgr                Communication              Other
   resource                Resource mgr                        manager            nodes
        DLL
                           Resource monitors           Resource
                                              management
                                                       interface
               Physical    Logical            App                       Nonaware
               resource    resource           resource                  app
               DLL         DLL                DLL
Cluster-aware
   app
Figure 16.17   Windows Cluster Server Block   Diagram

      message to the entire cluster, causing all members to exchange messages to verify
      their view of current cluster membership. If a node manager does not respond, it is
      removed from the cluster and its active groups are transferred to one or more other
      active nodes in the cluster.
         The configuration database manager maintains the cluster configuration
      database. The database contains information about resources and groups and node
      ownership of groups. The database managers on each of the cluster nodes cooper-
      ate to maintain a consistent picture of configuration information. Fault-tolerant
      transaction software is used to assure that changes in the overall cluster configura-
      tion are performed consistently and correctly.
         The  resource  manager/failover  manager      makes   all  decisions  regarding
      resource groups and initiates appropriate actions such as startup, reset, and failover.
      When failover is required, the failover managers on the active node cooperate to
      negotiate a distribution of resource groups from the failed system to the remain-
      ing active systems. When a system restarts after a failure, the failover manager can
      decide to move some groups back to this system. In particular, any group may be
      configured with a preferred owner. If that owner fails and then restarts, the group is
      moved back to the node in a rollback operation.
         The event processor connects all of the components of the cluster serv-
      ice, handles common operations, and controls cluster service initialization. The
      communications manager manages message exchange with all other nodes of the
      cluster. The global update manager provides a service used by other components
      within the cluster service.
         Microsoft is continuing to ship their cluster product, but they have also devel-
      oped virtualization solutions based on efficient live migration of virtual machines
      between hypervisors running on different computer systems as part of Windows
      Server 2008 R2. For new applications, live migration offers many benefits over the
      cluster approach, such as simpler management, and improved flexibility.
