 uses such as webserver farms print file servers clustered systems and large datacenter machines. the large datacenter machines can have up to gb of memory and processors on ia systems and gb and processors on ia systems. . design principles microsoft's design goals for windows xp include security reliability windows and posix application compatibility high performance extensibility portability and international support. . . security windows xp security goals required more than just adherence to the design standards that enabled windows nt . to receive a c security classification from the u.s. government which signifies a moderate level of protection from defective software and malicious attacks . extensive code review and testing were combined with sophisticated automatic analysis tools to identify and investigate potential defects that might represent security vulnerabilities. . . reliability windows was the most reliable stable operating system microsoft had ever shipped to that point. much of this reliability came from maturity in the source code extensive stress testing of the system and automatic detection of many serious errors in drivers. the reliability requirements for windows xp were even more stringent. microsoft used extensive manual and automatic code review to identify over lines in the source files that might contain issues not detected by testing and then set about reviewing each area to verify that the code was indeed correct. windows xp extends driver verification to catch more subtle bugs improves the facilities for catching programming errors in user level code and subjects third party applications drivers and devices to a rigorous certification process. furthermore windows xp adds new facilities for monitoring the health of the pc including downloading fixes for problems before they are encountered by users. the perceived reliability of windows xp was also improved by making the graphical user interface easier to use through better visual design simpler menus and measured improvements in the ease with which users can discover how to perform common tasks. . . windows and posix application compatibility windows xp is not only an update of windows it is a replacement for windows . windows focused primarily on compatibility for business applications. the requirements for windows xp include a much higher compatibility with consumer applications that run on windows . application compatibility is difficult to achieve because each application checks for a particular version of windows may have some dependence on the chapter windows xp quirks of the implementation of apis may have latent application bugs that were masked in the previous system and so forth. windows xp introduces a compatibility layer that falls between applications and the win apis. this layer makes windows xp look almost bug for bug compatible with previous versions of windows. windows xp like earlier nt releases maintains support for running many bit applications using a thunking or conversion layer that translates bit api calls into equivalent bit calls. similarly the bit version of windows xp provides a thunking layer that translates bit api calls into native bit calls. posix support in windows xp is much improved. a new posix subsystem called interix is now available. most available unix compatible software compiles and runs under interix without modification. . . high performance windows xp is designed to provide high performance on desktop systems which are largely constrained by i o performance server systems where the cpu is often the bottleneck and large multithreaded and multiprocessor environments where locking and cache line management are key to scalability . high performance has been an increasingly important goal for windows xp. windows with sql on compaq hardware achieved top tpc c numbers at the time it shipped. to satisfy performance requirements nt uses a variety of techniques such as asynchronous i o optimized protocols for networks for example optimistic locking of distributed data batching of requests kernel based graphics and sophisticated caching of file system data. the memory management and synchronization algorithms are designed with an awareness of the performance considerations related to cache lines and multiprocessors. windows xp has further improved performance by reducing the code path length in critical functions using better algorithms and per processor data structures using memory coloring for numa non uniform memory access machines and implementing more scalable locking protocols such as queued spinlocks. the new locking protocols help reduce system bus cycles and include lock free lists and queues use of atomic read modify write operations like interlocked increment and other advanced locking techniques. the subsystems that constitute windows xp communicate with one another efficiently by a local procedure call lpc facility that provides highperformance message passing. except while executing in the kernel dispatcher threads in the subsystems of windows xp can be preempted by higher priority threads. thus the system responds quickly to external events. in addition windows xp is designed for symmetrical multiprocessing on a multiprocessor computer several threads can run at the same time. . . extensibility extensibility refers to the capacity of an operating system to keep up with advances in computing technology. so that changes over time are facilitated the developers implemented windows xp using a layered architecture. the windows xp executive runs in kernel or protected mode and provides the basic system services. on top of the executive several server subsystems operate in user mode. among them are environmental subsystems that emulate