Virtual Machines
74  CHAPTER 2 / OPERATING SYSTEM OVERVIEW
2.5  VIRTUAL MACHINES
     Virtual Machines and Virtualizing
     Traditionally, applications have run directly on an OS on a PC or a server. Each PC
     or server would run only one OS at a time. Thus, the vendor had to rewrite parts
     of its applications for each OS/platform they would run on. An effective strategy
     for dealing with this problem is known as virtualization. Virtualization technology
     enables a single PC or server to simultaneously run multiple operating systems or
     multiple sessions of a single OS. A machine with virtualization can host numerous
     applications, including those that run on different operating systems, on a single
     platform. In essence, the host operating system can support a number of virtual
     machines (VM), each of which has the characteristics of a particular OS and, in some
     versions of virtualization, the characteristics of a particular hardware platform.
     The VM approach is becoming a common way for businesses and individuals
     to deal with legacy applications and to optimize their hardware usage by maximizing
     the number of kinds of applications that a single computer can handle [GEER09].
     Commercial VM offerings by companies such as VMware and Microsoft are widely
     used, with millions of copies having been sold. In addition to their use in server
     environments, these VM technologies also are used in desktop environments to run
     multiple operating systems, typically Windows and Linux.
     The  specific  architecture  of      the  VM  approach    varies        among  vendors.
     Figure 2.13 shows a typical arrangement. The virtual machine monitor (VMM), or
     hypervisor, runs on top of (or is incorporated into) the host OS. The VMM sup-
     ports VMs, which are emulated hardware devices. Each VM runs a separate OS.
     The VMM handles each operating system's communications with the processor,
     the storage medium, and the network. To execute programs, the VMM hands off
     the processor control to a virtual OS on a VM. Most VMs use virtualized network
          Applications         Applications                    Applications
                    and           and                          and
                    processes  processes                       processes
                    Virtual    Virtual                         Virtual
          machine 1            machine 2                       machine n
                               Virtual machine monitor
                                  Host operating system
                                  Shared hardware
          Figure 2.13          Virtual Memory Concept

                                                                2.5 / VIRTUAL MACHINES  75
connections to communicate with one another, when such communication is needed.
Key to the success of this approach is that the VMM provides a layer between soft-
ware environments and the underlying hardware and host OS that is programma-
ble, transparent to the software above it, and makes efficient use of the hardware
below it.
Virtual Machine Architecture2
Recall from Section 2.1 (see Figure 2.1) the discussion of the application program-
ming interface, the application binary interface, and the instruction set archi-
tecture. Let us use these interface concepts to clarify the meaning of machine in
the term virtual machine. Consider a process executing a compiled application
program. From the perspective of the process, the machine on which it executes
consists of the virtual memory space assigned to the process, the processor reg-
isters it may use, the user-level machine instructions it may execute, and the OS
system calls it may invoke for I/O. Thus the ABI defines the machine as seen by
a process.
From the perspective of an application, the machine characteristics are speci-
fied by high-level language capabilities, and OS and system library calls. Thus, the
API defines the machine for an application.
For the operating system, the machine hardware defines the system that
supports the operation of the OS and the numerous processes that execute con-
currently. These processes share a file system and other I/O resources. The system
allocates real memory and I/O resources to the processes and allows the processes
to interact with their resources. From the OS perspective, therefore, it is the ISA
that provides the interface between the system and machine.
With        these    considerations  in  mind,              we  can  consider  two  architectural
approaches to implementing virtual machines: process VMs and system VMs.
PROCESS     VIRTUAL  MACHINE  In essence, a process VM presents an ABI to an
application process, translates a set of OS and user-level instructions composing one
platform to those of another (Figure 2.14a). A process VM is a virtual platform for
executing a single process. As such, the process VM is created when the process is
created and terminated when the process is terminated.
In order to provide cross-platform portability, a common implementation of
the process VM architecture is as part of an overall HLL application environment.
The resulting ABI does not correspond to any specific machine. Instead, the ABI
specification is designed to easily support a given HLL or set of HLLs and to be eas-
ily portable to a variety of ISAs. The HLL VM includes a front-end compiler that
generates a virtual binary code for execution or interpretation. This code can then
be executed on any machine that has the process VM implemented.
Two widely used examples of this approach are the Java VM architecture and
the Microsoft Common Language Infrastructure, which is the foundation of the
.NET framework.
2Much of the discussion that follows is based on [SMIT05].

76  CHAPTER  2  /  OPERATING SYSTEM OVERVIEW
                                Virtualizing                  Application
                                architecture                      view
                   Guest        Application                   Application
                                    process                       process
                                              ABI
                   VM           Virtualizing
                   software     software                          Process
                                                                  virtual
                                OS                            machine
                   Host                       ABI
                                Hardware
                                              (a) Process VM
                                Applications                  Applications
                   Guest
                                OS                            OS
                                              API
                   VMM          Virtualizing
                                software                          System
                                              ISA                 virtual
                   Host         Hardware                      machine
                                              (b) System VM
                   Figure 2.14  Process and System Virtual    Machines
    SYSTEM VIRTUAL MACHINE          In a system VM, virtualizing software translates the
    ISA used by one hardware platform to that of another. Note in Figure 2.14a that
    the virtualizing software in the process VM approach makes use of the services of
    the host OS, while in the system VM approach there is logically no separate host
    OS, rather the host system OS incorporates the VM capability. In the system VM
    case, the virtualizing software is host to a number of guest operating systems, with
    each VM including its own OS. The VMM emulates the hardware ISA so that the
    guest software can potentially execute a different ISA from the one implemented
    on the host.
    With the system VM approach, a single hardware platform can support mul-
    tiple, isolated guest OS environments simultaneously. This approach provides a
    number of benefits, including application portability, support of legacy systems
    without the need to maintain legacy hardware, and security by means of isolation of
    each guest OS environment from the other guest environments.
    A variant on the architecture shown in Figure 2.14b is referred to as a hosted
    VM. In this case, the VMM is built on top of an existing host OS. The VMM relies
    on the host OS to provide device drivers and other lower-level services. An example
    of a hosted VM is the VMware GSX server.

2.6 / OS DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR MULTIPROCESSOR AND MULTICORE                            77
2.6  OS DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR MULTIPROCESSOR
     AND MULTICORE
     Symmetric Multiprocessor OS Considerations
     In an SMP system, the kernel can execute on any processor, and typically each
     processor does self-scheduling from the pool of available processes or threads.
     The kernel can be constructed as multiple processes or multiple threads, allowing
     portions of the kernel to execute in parallel. The SMP approach complicates the OS.
     The OS designer must deal with the complexity due to sharing resources (like data
     structures) and coordinating actions (like accessing devices) from multiple parts of
     the OS executing at the same time. Techniques must be employed to resolve and
     synchronize claims to resources.
        An SMP operating system manages processor and other computer resources
     so that the user may view the system in the same fashion as a multiprogramming
     uniprocessor system. A user may construct applications that use multiple processes
     or multiple threads within processes without regard to whether a single processor
     or multiple processors will be available. Thus, a multiprocessor OS must provide all
     the functionality of a multiprogramming system plus additional features to accom-
     modate multiple processors. The key design issues include the following:
       Simultaneous concurrent processes or threads: Kernel routines need to be
        reentrant to allow several processors to execute the same kernel code simulta-
        neously. With multiple processors executing the same or different parts of the
        kernel, kernel tables and management structures must be managed properly
        to avoid data corruption or invalid operations.
       Scheduling: Any processor may perform scheduling, which complicates the
        task of enforcing a scheduling policy and assuring that corruption of the sched-
        uler data structures is avoided. If kernel-level multithreading is used, then the
        opportunity exists to schedule multiple threads from the same process simul-
        taneously on multiple processors. Multiprocessor scheduling is examined in
        Chapter 10.
       Synchronization: With multiple active processes having potential access to
        shared address spaces or shared I/O resources, care must be taken to provide
        effective synchronization. Synchronization is a facility that enforces mutual
        exclusion and event ordering. A common synchronization mechanism used in
        multiprocessor operating systems is locks, described in Chapter 5.
       Memory management: Memory management on a multiprocessor must deal
        with all of the issues found on uniprocessor computers and is discussed in Part
        Three. In addition, the OS needs to exploit the available hardware parallelism
        to achieve the best performance. The paging mechanisms on different proc-
        essors must be coordinated to enforce consistency when several processors
        share a page or segment and to decide on page replacement. The reuse of
        physical pages is the biggest problem of concern; that is, it must be guaranteed
        that a physical page can no longer be accessed with its old contents before the
        page is put to a new use.
