Summary
      location, and execution starts there. At that location is the initial bootstrap
      program. This program is in the form of read-only memory (ROM), because
      the RAM is in an unknown state at system startup. ROM is convenient because
      it needs no initialization and cannot easily be infected by a computer virus.
      The bootstrap program can perform a variety of tasks. Usually, one task
      is to run diagnostics to determine the state of the machine. If the diagnostics
      pass, the program can continue with the booting steps. It can also initialize all
      aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device controllers and the contents
      of main memory. Sooner or later, it starts the operating system.
      Some systems--such as cellular phones, tablets, and game consoles--store
      the entire operating system in ROM. Storing the operating system in ROM is
      suitable for small operating systems, simple supporting hardware, and rugged
      operation. A problem with this approach is that changing the bootstrap code
      requires changing the ROM hardware chips. Some systems resolve this problem
      by using erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM), which is read-
      only except when explicitly given a command to become writable. All forms
      of ROM are also known as firmware, since their characteristics fall somewhere
      between those of hardware and those of software. A problem with firmware
      in general is that executing code there is slower than executing code in RAM.
      Some systems store the operating system in firmware and copy it to RAM for
      fast execution. A final issue with firmware is that it is relatively expensive, so
      usually only small amounts are available.
      For large operating systems (including most general-purpose operating
      systems    like  Windows,   Mac     OS   X,  and  UNIX)  or  for  systems    that  change
      frequently, the bootstrap loader is stored in firmware, and the operating system
      is on disk. In this case, the bootstrap runs diagnostics and has a bit of code
      that can read a single block at a fixed location (say block zero) from disk into
      memory and execute the code from that boot block. The program stored in the
      boot block may be sophisticated enough to load the entire operating system
      into memory and begin its execution. More typically, it is simple code (as it fits
      in a single disk block) and knows only the address on disk and length of the
      remainder of the bootstrap program. GRUB is an example of an open-source
      bootstrap program for Linux systems. All of the disk-bound bootstrap, and the
      operating system itself, can be easily changed by writing new versions to disk.
      A disk that has a boot partition (more on that in Section 10.5.1) is called a boot
      disk or system disk.
      Now that the full bootstrap program has been loaded, it can traverse the
      file system to find the operating system kernel, load it into memory, and start
      its execution. It is only at this point that the system is said to be running.
2.11  