Introduction
An operating system is a program that manages a computer's hardware. It
also provides a basis for application programs and acts as an intermediary
between the computer user and the computer hardware. An amazing aspect of
operating systems is how they vary in accomplishing these tasks. Mainframe
operating systems are designed primarily to optimize utilization of hardware.
Personal computer (PC) operating systems support complex games, business
applications, and everything in between. Operating systems for mobile com-
puters provide an environment in which a user can easily interface with the
computer to execute programs. Thus, some operating systems are designed to
be convenient, others to be efficient, and others to be some combination of the
two.
Before we can explore the details of computer system operation, we need to
know something about system structure. We thus discuss the basic functions
of system startup, I/O, and storage early in this chapter. We also describe
the basic computer architecture that makes it possible to write a functional
operating system.
Because an operating system is large and complex, it must be created
piece by piece. Each of these pieces should be a well-delineated portion of the
system, with carefully defined inputs, outputs, and functions. In this chapter,
we provide a general overview of the major components of a contemporary
computer system as well as the functions provided by the operating system.
Additionally,  we  cover  several  other  topics  to  help  set  the  stage  for  the
remainder of this text: data structures used in operating systems, computing
environments, and open-source operating systems.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
路 To describe the basic organization of computer systems.
路 To provide a grand tour of the major components of operating systems.
路 To give an overview of the many types of computing environments.
路 To explore several open-source operating systems.
                                                                                  3
