Example: ARM Architecture
     Although Intel chips have dominated the personal computer market for over 30
     years, chips for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers often
     instead run on 32-bit ARM processors. Interestingly, whereas Intel both designs
     and manufactures chips, ARM only designs them. It then licenses its designs to
     chip manufacturers. Apple has licensed the ARM design for its iPhone and iPad
     mobile devices, and several Android-based smartphones use ARM processors
     as well.
         The 32-bit ARM architecture supports the following page sizes:
     1.  4-KB and 16-KB pages
     2.  1-MB and 16-MB pages (termed sections)
     The paging system in use depends on whether a page or a section is being
     referenced. One-level paging is used for 1-MB and 16-MB sections; two-level
     paging is used for 4-KB and 16-KB pages. Address translation with the ARM
     MMU is shown in Figure 8.26.
         The ARM architecture also supports two levels of TLBs. At the outer level
     are two micro TLBs--a separate TLB for data and another for instructions.
     The micro TLB supports ASIDs as well. At the inner level is a single main TLB.
     Address translation begins at the micro TLB level. In the case of a miss, the
     main TLB is then checked. If both TLBs yield misses, a page table walk must be
     performed in hardware.
                                   32 bits
         outer page                inner page                           offset
                                                                        4-KB
                                                                        or
                                                                        16-KB
                                                                        page
                                                                        1-MB
                                                                        or
                                                                        16-MB
                                                                        section
                     Figure 8.26   Logical address translation in ARM.
