Overview of Mass-Storage Structure
      In this section, we present a general overview of the physical structure of
      secondary and tertiary storage devices.
      10.1.1  Magnetic Disks
      Magnetic disks provide the bulk of secondary storage for modern computer
      systems. Conceptually, disks are relatively simple (Figure 10.1). Each disk
      platter has a flat circular shape, like a CD. Common platter diameters range
      from 1.8 to 3.5 inches. The two surfaces of a platter are covered with a magnetic
      material. We store information by recording it magnetically on the platters.
                                                                                           467



468  Chapter 10  Mass-Storage Structure
                 track t                  spindle
                                                                       arm assembly
     sector s
                cylinder c                         read-write
                                                   head
     platter
                                          arm
                                rotation
                            Figure 10.1   Moving-head disk mechanism.
     A read­write head "flies" just above each surface of every platter. The
     heads are attached to a disk arm that moves all the heads as a unit. The surface
     of a platter is logically divided into circular tracks, which are subdivided into
     sectors. The set of tracks that are at one arm position makes up a cylinder.
     There may be thousands of concentric cylinders in a disk drive, and each track
     may contain hundreds of sectors. The storage capacity of common disk drives
     is measured in gigabytes.
     When the disk is in use, a drive motor spins it at high speed. Most drives
     rotate 60 to 250 times per second, specified in terms of rotations per minute
     (RPM). Common drives spin at 5,400, 7,200, 10,000, and 15,000 RPM. Disk speed
     has two parts. The transfer rate is the rate at which data flow between the drive
     and the computer. The positioning time, or random-access time, consists of
     two parts: the time necessary to move the disk arm to the desired cylinder,
     called the seek time, and the time necessary for the desired sector to rotate to
     the disk head, called the rotational latency. Typical disks can transfer several
     megabytes of data per second, and they have seek times and rotational latencies
     of several milliseconds.
     Because the disk head flies on an extremely thin cushion of air (measured
     in microns), there is a danger that the head will make contact with the disk
     surface. Although the disk platters are coated with a thin protective layer, the
     head will sometimes damage the magnetic surface. This accident is called a
     head crash. A head crash normally cannot be repaired; the entire disk must be
     replaced.
     A disk can be removable, allowing different disks to be mounted as needed.
     Removable magnetic disks generally consist of one platter, held in a plastic
     case to prevent damage while not in the disk drive. Other forms of removable
     disks include CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray discs as well as removable flash-memory
     devices known as flash drives (which are a type of solid-state drive).



                        10.1  