Storage Management
     To make the computer system convenient for users, the operating system
     provides a uniform, logical view of information storage. The operating system
     abstracts from the physical properties of its storage devices to define a logical
     storage unit, the file. The operating system maps files onto physical media and
     accesses these files via the storage devices.
     1.8.1  File-System Management
     File management is one of the most visible components of an operating system.
     Computers can store information on several different types of physical media.
     Magnetic disk, optical disk, and magnetic tape are the most common. Each
     of these media has its own characteristics and physical organization. Each
     medium is controlled by a device, such as a disk drive or tape drive, that
     also has its own unique characteristics. These properties include access speed,
     capacity, data-transfer rate, and access method (sequential or random).
        A file is a collection of related information defined by its creator. Commonly,
     files represent programs (both source and object forms) and data. Data files may
     be numeric, alphabetic, alphanumeric, or binary. Files may be free-form (for
     example, text files), or they may be formatted rigidly (for example, fixed fields).
     Clearly, the concept of a file is an extremely general one.
        The operating system implements the abstract concept of a file by managing
     mass-storage media, such as tapes and disks, and the devices that control them.
     In addition, files are normally organized into directories to make them easier
     to use. Finally, when multiple users have access to files, it may be desirable
     to control which user may access a file and how that user may access it (for
     example, read, write, append).
        The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
     tion with file management:
     ·  Creating and deleting files



                                         1.8  