Swap-Space Management
      Swapping was first presented in Section 8.2, where we discussed moving
      entire processes between disk and main memory. Swapping in that setting
      occurs when the amount of physical memory reaches a critically low point and
      processes are moved from memory to swap space to free available memory.
      In  practice,  very  few  modern  operating     systems  implement   swapping       in
      this fashion. Rather, systems now combine swapping with virtual memory
      techniques (Chapter 9) and swap pages, not necessarily entire processes. In fact,
      some systems now use the terms "swapping" and "paging" interchangeably,
      reflecting the merging of these two concepts.
          Swap-space       management   is   another  low-level  task  of  the  operating
      system. Virtual memory uses disk space as an extension of main memory.
      Since disk access is much slower than memory access, using swap space
      significantly decreases system performance. The main goal for the design and
      implementation of swap space is to provide the best throughput for the virtual
      memory system. In this section, we discuss how swap space is used, where
      swap space is located on disk, and how swap space is managed.
      10.6.1  Swap-Space Use
      Swap space is used in various ways by different operating systems, depending
      on the memory-management algorithms in use. For instance, systems that
      implement swapping may use swap space to hold an entire process image,
      including the code and data segments. Paging systems may simply store pages
      that have been pushed out of main memory. The amount of swap space needed
      on a system can therefore vary from a few megabytes of disk space to gigabytes,
      depending on the amount of physical memory, the amount of virtual memory
      it is backing, and the way in which the virtual memory is used.
          Note that it may be safer to overestimate than to underestimate the amount
      of swap space required, because if a system runs out of swap space it may be
      forced to abort processes or may crash entirely. Overestimation wastes disk
      space that could otherwise be used for files, but it does no other harm. Some
      systems recommend the amount to be set aside for swap space. Solaris, for
      example, suggests setting swap space equal to the amount by which virtual
      memory exceeds pageable physical memory. In the past, Linux has suggested



                                        10.6  