Protection and Security
     If a computer system has multiple users and allows the concurrent execution
     of multiple processes, then access to data must be regulated. For that purpose,
     mechanisms ensure that files, memory segments, CPU, and other resources can
     be operated on by only those processes that have gained proper authoriza-
     tion from the operating system. For example, memory-addressing hardware
     ensures that a process can execute only within its own address space. The
     timer ensures that no process can gain control of the CPU without eventually
     relinquishing control. Device-control registers are not accessible to users, so
     the integrity of the various peripheral devices is protected.
          Protection, then, is any mechanism for controlling the access of processes
     or users to the resources defined by a computer system. This mechanism must
     provide means to specify the controls to be imposed and to enforce the controls.
          Protection can improve reliability by detecting latent errors at the interfaces
     between component subsystems. Early detection of interface errors can often
     prevent contamination of a healthy subsystem by another subsystem that is
     malfunctioning. Furthermore, an unprotected resource cannot defend against
     use (or misuse) by an unauthorized or incompetent user. A protection-oriented
     system provides a means to distinguish between authorized and unauthorized
     usage, as we discuss in Chapter 14.
          A system can have adequate protection but still be prone to failure and
     allow inappropriate access. Consider a user whose authentication information
     (her means of identifying herself to the system) is stolen. Her data could be
     copied or deleted, even though file and memory protection are working. It is
     the job of security to defend a system from external and internal attacks. Such
     attacks spread across a huge range and include viruses and worms, denial-of-
     service attacks (which use all of a system's resources and so keep legitimate
     users out of the system), identity theft, and theft of service (unauthorized
     use  of  a  system).  Prevention  of  some  of  these  attacks  is  considered        an
     operating-system function on some systems, while other systems leave it to
     policy or additional software. Due to the alarming rise in security incidents,
