Kernel Data Structures
      operating-system security features represent a fast-growing area of research
      and implementation. We discuss security in Chapter 15.
           Protection and security require the system to be able to distinguish among
      all  its  users.  Most  operating  systems   maintain  a  list  of  user  names     and
      associated user identifiers (user IDs). In Windows parlance, this is a security
      ID (SID). These numerical IDs are unique, one per user. When a user logs in
      to the system, the authentication stage determines the appropriate user ID for
      the user. That user ID is associated with all of the user's processes and threads.
      When an ID needs to be readable by a user, it is translated back to the user
      name via the user name list.
           In some circumstances, we wish to distinguish among sets of users rather
      than individual users. For example, the owner of a file on a UNIX system may be
      allowed to issue all operations on that file, whereas a selected set of users may
      be allowed only to read the file. To accomplish this, we need to define a group
      name and the set of users belonging to that group. Group functionality can
      be implemented as a system-wide list of group names and group identifiers.
      A user can be in one or more groups, depending on operating-system design
      decisions. The user's group IDs are also included in every associated process
      and thread.
           In the course of normal system use, the user ID and group ID for a user
      are sufficient. However, a user sometimes needs to escalate privileges to gain
      extra permissions for an activity. The user may need access to a device that is
      restricted, for example. Operating systems provide various methods to allow
      privilege escalation. On UNIX, for instance, the setuid attribute on a program
      causes that program to run with the user ID of the owner of the file, rather than
      the current user's ID. The process runs with this effective UID until it turns off
      the extra privileges or terminates.
1.10  