File Sharing
      In the previous sections, we explored the motivation for file sharing and some of
      the difficulties involved in allowing users to share files. Such file sharing is very
      desirable for users who want to collaborate and to reduce the effort required
      to achieve a computing goal. Therefore, user-oriented operating systems must
      accommodate the need to share files in spite of the inherent difficulties.
      In this section, we examine more aspects of file sharing. We begin by
      discussing general issues that arise when multiple users share files. Once
      multiple users are allowed to share files, the challenge is to extend sharing to
      multiple file systems, including remote file systems; we discuss that challenge
      as well. Finally, we consider what to do about conflicting actions occurring on
      shared files. For instance, if multiple users are writing to a file, should all the
      writes be allowed to occur, or should the operating system protect the users'
      actions from one another?
      11.5.1  Multiple Users
      When an operating system accommodates multiple users, the issues of file
      sharing, file naming, and file protection become preeminent. Given a directory
      structure that allows files to be shared by users, the system must mediate the
      file sharing. The system can either allow a user to access the files of other users
      by default or require that a user specifically grant access to the files. These are
      the issues of access control and protection, which are covered in Section 11.6.
      To implement sharing and protection, the system must maintain more
      file and directory attributes than are needed on a single-user system. Although
      many approaches have been taken to meet this requirement, most systems have
      evolved to use the concepts of file (or directory) owner (or user) and group.
      The owner is the user who can change attributes and grant access and who has



                                                     11.5      