NFS
      ·  Day 2. Copy to another medium all files changed since day 1. This is an
         incremental backup.
      ·  Day 3. Copy to another medium all files changed since day 2.
                                          .
                                          .
                                          .
      ·  Day N. Copy to another medium all files changed since day N- 1. Then
         go back to day 1.
         The new cycle can have its backup written over the previous set or onto a
      new set of backup media.
         Using this method, we can restore an entire disk by starting restores with
      the full backup and continuing through each of the incremental backups. Of
      course, the larger the value of N, the greater the number of media that must be
      read for a complete restore. An added advantage of this backup cycle is that
      we can restore any file accidentally deleted during the cycle by retrieving the
      deleted file from the backup of the previous day.
         The length of the cycle is a compromise between the amount of backup
      medium needed and the number of days covered by a restore. To decrease the
      number of tapes that must be read to do a restore, an option is to perform a
      full backup and then each day back up all files that have changed since the
      full backup. In this way, a restore can be done via the most recent incremental
      backup and the full backup, with no other incremental backups needed. The
      trade-off is that more files will be modified each day, so each successive
      incremental backup involves more files and more backup media.
         A user may notice that a particular file is missing or corrupted long after
      the damage was done. For this reason, we usually plan to take a full backup
      from time to time that will be saved "forever." It is a good idea to store these
      permanent backups far away from the regular backups to protect against
      hazard, such as a fire that destroys the computer and all the backups too.
      And if the backup cycle reuses media, we must take care not to reuse the
      media too many times--if the media wear out, it might not be possible to
      restore any data from the backups.
12.8  