I/O Hardware
      Computers operate a great many kinds of devices. Most fit into the general
      categories of storage devices (disks, tapes), transmission devices (network con-
      nections, Bluetooth), and human-interface devices (screen, keyboard, mouse,
      audio in and out). Other devices are more specialized, such as those involved in
      the steering of a jet. In these aircraft, a human gives input to the flight computer
      via a joystick and foot pedals, and the computer sends output commands that
      cause motors to move rudders and flaps and fuels to the engines. Despite
      the incredible variety of I/O devices, though, we need only a few concepts to
      understand how the devices are attached and how the software can control the
      hardware.
      A device communicates with a computer system by sending signals over
      a cable or even through the air. The device communicates with the machine
      via a connection point, or port--for example, a serial port. If devices share a
      common set of wires, the connection is called a bus. A bus is a set of wires and
      a rigidly defined protocol that specifies a set of messages that can be sent on
      the wires. In terms of the electronics, the messages are conveyed by patterns
      of electrical voltages applied to the wires with defined timings. When device
      A has a cable that plugs into device B, and device B has a cable that plugs into
      device C, and device C plugs into a port on the computer, this arrangement is
      called a daisy chain. A daisy chain usually operates as a bus.
      Buses are used widely in computer architecture and vary in their signaling
      methods,    speed,  throughput,  and  connection  methods.      A  typical  PC        bus
      structure appears in Figure 13.1. In the figure, a PCI bus (the common PC
      system bus) connects the processor­memory subsystem to fast devices, and
      an expansion bus connects relatively slow devices, such as the keyboard and
      serial and USB ports. In the upper-right portion of the figure, four disks are
      connected together on a Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) bus plugged
      into a SCSI controller. Other common buses used to interconnect main parts of
      a computer include PCI Express (PCIe), with throughput of up to 16 GB per
      second, and HyperTransport, with throughput of up to 25 GB per second.
      A controller is a collection of electronics that can operate a port, a bus,
      or a device. A serial-port controller is a simple device controller. It is a single
      chip (or portion of a chip) in the computer that controls the signals on the



                                                      13.2     