Domain of Protection
      user to gain maximum privileges and access to the entire system (as happens
      too often today).
      Such an operating system also provides system calls and services that
      allow applications to be written with fine-grained access controls. It provides
      mechanisms to enable privileges when they are needed and to disable them
      when they are not needed. Also beneficial is the creation of audit trails for
      all privileged function access. The audit trail allows the programmer, system
      administrator, or law-enforcement officer to trace all protection and security
      activities on the system.
      Managing users with the principle of least privilege entails creating a
      separate account for each user, with just the privileges that the user needs. An
      operator who needs to mount tapes and back up files on the system has access
      to just those commands and files needed to accomplish the job. Some systems
      implement role-based access control (RBAC) to provide this functionality.
      Computers implemented in a computing facility under the principle of least
      privilege can be limited to running specific services, accessing specific remote
      hosts via specific services, and doing so during specific times. Typically, these
      restrictions are implemented through enabling or disabling each service and
      through using access control lists, as described in Sections Section 11.6.2 and
      Section 14.6.
      The principle of least privilege can help produce a more secure computing
      environment. Unfortunately, it frequently does not. For example, Windows
      2000 has a complex protection scheme at its core and yet has many security
      holes. By comparison, Solaris is considered relatively secure, even though it
      is a variant of UNIX, which historically was designed with little protection
      in mind. One reason for the difference may be that Windows 2000 has more
      lines of code and more services than Solaris and thus has more to secure and
      protect. Another reason could be that the protection scheme in Windows 2000
      is incomplete or protects the wrong aspects of the operating system, leaving
      other areas vulnerable.
14.3  