Capability-Based Systems
         capability and its table entry must match. This scheme was adopted in the
         CAL system. It does not allow selective revocation.
      ·  Keys. A key is a unique bit pattern that can be associated with a capability.
         This key is defined when the capability is created, and it can be neither
         modified nor inspected by the process that owns the capability. A master
         key is associated with each object; it can be defined or replaced with
         the set-key operation. When a capability is created, the current value
         of the master key is associated with the capability. When the capability
         is exercised, its key is compared with the master key. If the keys match,
         the operation is allowed to continue; otherwise, an exception condition
         is raised. Revocation replaces the master key with a new value via the
         set-key operation, invalidating all previous capabilities for this object.
              This scheme does not allow selective revocation, since only one master
         key is associated with each object. If we associate a list of keys with each
         object, then selective revocation can be implemented. Finally, we can group
         all keys into one global table of keys. A capability is valid only if its
         key matches some key in the global table. We implement revocation by
         removing the matching key from the table. With this scheme, a key can be
         associated with several objects, and several keys can be associated with
         each object, providing maximum flexibility.
              In key-based schemes, the operations of defining keys, inserting them
         into lists, and deleting them from lists should not be available to all users.
         In particular, it would be reasonable to allow only the owner of an object
         to set the keys for that object. This choice, however, is a policy decision
         that the protection system can implement but should not define.
14.8  