The Security Problem
      In many applications, ensuring the security of the computer system is worth
      considerable effort. Large commercial systems containing payroll or other
      financial data are inviting targets to thieves. Systems that contain data pertain-
      ing to corporate operations may be of interest to unscrupulous competitors.
      Furthermore, loss of such data, whether by accident or fraud, can seriously
      impair the ability of the corporation to function.
      In Chapter 14, we discussed mechanisms that the operating system can
      provide (with appropriate aid from the hardware) that allow users to protect
                                                                                          657



658  Chapter 15  Security
     their resources, including programs and data. These mechanisms work well
     only as long as the users conform to the intended use of and access to these
     resources. We say that a system is secure if its resources are used and accessed
     as intended under all circumstances. Unfortunately, total security cannot be
     achieved. Nonetheless, we must have mechanisms to make security breaches
     a rare occurrence, rather than the norm.
        Security violations (or misuse) of the system can be categorized as inten-
     tional (malicious) or accidental. It is easier to protect against accidental misuse
     than against malicious misuse. For the most part, protection mechanisms are
     the core of protection from accidents. The following list includes several forms
     of accidental and malicious security violations. We should note that in our dis-
     cussion of security, we use the terms intruder and cracker for those attempting
     to breach security. In addition, a threat is the potential for a security violation,
     such as the discovery of a vulnerability, whereas an attack is the attempt to
     break security.
     ·  Breach of confidentiality. This type of violation involves unauthorized
        reading of data (or theft of information). Typically, a breach of confiden-
        tiality is the goal of an intruder. Capturing secret data from a system or
        a data stream, such as credit-card information or identity information for
        identity theft, can result directly in money for the intruder.
     ·  Breach of integrity. This violation involves unauthorized modification
        of data. Such attacks can, for example, result in passing of liability to
        an innocent party or modification of the source code of an important
        commercial application.
     ·  Breach of availability. This violation involves unauthorized destruction of
        data. Some crackers would rather wreak havoc and gain status or bragging
        rights than gain financially. Website defacement is a common example of
        this type of security breach.
     ·  Theft of service. This violation involves unauthorized use of resources.
        For example, an intruder (or intrusion program) may install a daemon on
        a system that acts as a file server.
     ·  Denial of service. This violation involves preventing legitimate use of
        the system. Denial-of-service (DOS) attacks are sometimes accidental. The
        original Internet worm turned into a DOS attack when a bug failed to delay
        its rapid spread. We discuss DOS attacks further in Section 15.3.3.
        Attackers     use  several   standard  methods  in   their  attempts  to  breach
     security. The most common is masquerading, in which one participant in
     a  communication      pretends  to  be   someone  else  (another   host  or  another
     person). By masquerading, attackers breach authentication, the correctness
     of identification; they can then gain access that they would not normally be
     allowed or escalate their privileges--obtain privileges to which they would not
     normally be entitled. Another common attack is to replay a captured exchange
     of data. A replay attack consists of the malicious or fraudulent repeat of a
     valid data transmission. Sometimes the replay comprises the entire attack--
     for example, in a repeat of a request to transfer money. But frequently it is
     done along with message modification, again to escalate privileges. Consider



                                              15.1  