System and Network Threats
      ·  Multipartite. A virus of this type is able to infect multiple parts of a system,
         including boot sectors, memory, and files. This makes it difficult to detect
         and contain.
      ·  Armored.      An  armored  virus  is  coded  to  make  it  hard  for  antivirus
         researchers to unravel and understand. It can also be compressed to avoid
         detection and disinfection. In addition, virus droppers and other full files
         that are part of a virus infestation are frequently hidden via file attributes
         or unviewable file names.
         This vast variety of viruses has continued to grow. For example, in 2004
      a new and widespread virus was detected. It exploited three separate bugs
      for its operation. This virus started by infecting hundreds of Windows servers
      (including many trusted sites) running Microsoft Internet Information Server
      (IIS). Any vulnerable Microsoft Explorer web browser visiting those sites
      received a browser virus with any download. The browser virus installed
      several back-door programs, including a keystroke logger, which records
      everything entered on the keyboard (including passwords and credit-card
      numbers). It also installed a daemon to allow unlimited remote access by
      an intruder and another that allowed an intruder to route spam through the
      infected desktop computer.
         Generally, viruses are the most disruptive security attacks, and because
      they are effective, they will continue to be written and to spread. An active
      security-related debate within the computing community concerns the exis-
      tence of a monoculture, in which many systems run the same hardware,
      operating system, and application software. This monoculture supposedly
      consists of Microsoft products. One question is whether such a monoculture
      even exists today. Another question is whether, if it does, it increases the threat
      of and damage caused by viruses and other security intrusions.
15.3  