Implementing Security Defenses
      Another variation on one-time passwords uses a code book, or one-time
      pad, which is a list of single-use passwords. Each password on the list is used
      once and then is crossed out or erased. The commonly used S/Key system
      uses either a software calculator or a code book based on these calculations
      as a source of one-time passwords. Of course, the user must protect his code
      book, and it is helpful if the code book does not identify the system to which
      the codes are authenticators.
      15.5.5   Biometrics
      Yet another variation on the use of passwords for authentication involves
      the use of biometric measures. Palm- or hand-readers are commonly used to
      secure physical access--for example, access to a data center. These readers
      match stored parameters against what is being read from hand-reader pads.
      The parameters can include a temperature map, as well as finger length, finger
      width, and line patterns. These devices are currently too large and expensive
      to be used for normal computer authentication.
      Fingerprint readers have become accurate and cost-effective and should
      become more common in the future. These devices read finger ridge patterns
      and convert them into a sequence of numbers. Over time, they can store a set of
      sequences to adjust for the location of the finger on the reading pad and other
      factors. Software can then scan a finger on the pad and compare its features
      with these stored sequences to determine if they match. Of course, multiple
      users can have profiles stored, and the scanner can differentiate among them.
      A very accurate two-factor authentication scheme can result from requiring
      a password as well as a user name and fingerprint scan. If this information
      is encrypted in transit, the system can be very resistant to spoofing or replay
      attack.
      Multifactor authentication is better still. Consider how strong authentica-
      tion can be with a USB device that must be plugged into the system, a PIN, and
      a fingerprint scan. Except for having to place ones finger on a pad and plug the
      USB into the system, this authentication method is no less convenient than that
      using normal passwords. Recall, though, that strong authentication by itself is
      not sufficient to guarantee the ID of the user. An authenticated session can still
      be hijacked if it is not encrypted.
15.6  