Computer-Security Classifications
      The U.S. Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
      specify four security classifications in systems: A, B, C, and D. This specification
      is widely used to determine the security of a facility and to model security
      solutions, so we explore it here. The lowest-level classification is division D, or
      minimal protection. Division D includes only one class and is used for systems
      that have failed to meet the requirements of any of the other security classes.
      For instance, MS-DOS and Windows 3.1 are in division D.
      Division C, the next level of security, provides discretionary protection and
      accountability of users and their actions through the use of audit capabilities.
      Division C has two levels: C1 and C2. A C1-class system incorporates some
      form    of  controls  that  allow  users  to  protect  private    information  and     to
      keep other users from accidentally reading or destroying their data. A C1
      environment is one in which cooperating users access data at the same levels
      of sensitivity. Most versions of UNIX are C1 class.
      The total of all protection systems within a computer system (hardware,
      software, firmware) that correctly enforce a security policy is known as a
      trusted computer base (TCB). The TCB of a C1 system controls access between
      users and files by allowing the user to specify and control sharing of objects
      by named individuals or defined groups. In addition, the TCB requires that the
      users identify themselves before they start any activities that the TCB is expected
      to mediate. This identification is accomplished via a protected mechanism or
      password. The TCB protects the authentication data so that they are inaccessible
      to unauthorized users.
      A C2-class system adds an individual-level access control to the require-
      ments of a C1 system. For example, access rights of a file can be specified
      to the level of a single individual. In addition, the system administrator can
      selectively audit the actions of any one or more users based on individual
      identity. The TCB also protects itself from modification of its code or data
      structures. In addition, no information produced by a prior user is available
      to another user who accesses a storage object that has been released back to
      the system. Some special, secure versions of UNIX have been certified at the C2
      level.
      Division-B  mandatory-protection          systems      have  all  the  properties  of  a
      class-C2 system. In addition, they attach a sensitivity label to each object
      in the system. The B1-class TCB maintains these labels, which are used for
      decisions pertaining to mandatory access control. For example, a user at the
      confidential level could not access a file at the more sensitive secret level.
      The TCB also denotes the sensitivity level at the top and bottom of each
