An Example: Windows 7
      page of any human-readable output. In addition to the normal user-name ­
      password authentication information, the TCB also maintains the clearance
      and authorizations of individual users and will support at least two levels of
      security. These levels are hierarchical, so that a user may access any objects
      that carry sensitivity labels equal to or lower than his security clearance. For
      example, a secret-level user could access a file at the confidential level in the
      absence of other access controls. Processes are also isolated through the use of
      distinct address spaces.
           A B2-class system extends the sensitivity labels to each system resource,
      such as storage objects. Physical devices are assigned minimum and maximum
      security levels that the system uses to enforce constraints imposed by the
      physical environments in which the devices are located. In addition, a B2
      system supports covert channels and the auditing of events that could lead to
      the exploitation of a covert channel.
           A B3-class system allows the creation of access-control lists that denote
      users or groups not granted access to a given named object. The TCB also
      contains a mechanism to monitor events that may indicate a violation of
      security policy. The mechanism notifies the security administrator and, if
      necessary, terminates the event in the least disruptive manner.
           The highest-level classification is division A. Architecturally, a class-A1
      system is functionally equivalent to a B3 system, but it uses formal design
      specifications and verification techniques, granting a high degree of assurance
      that the TCB has been implemented correctly. A system beyond class A1 might
      be designed and developed in a trusted facility by trusted personnel.
           The use of a TCB merely ensures that the system can enforce aspects of a
      security policy; the TCB does not specify what the policy should be. Typically,
      a given computing environment develops a security policy for certification
      and  has   the  plan   accredited    by  a  security  agency,  such  as    the  National
      Computer Security Center. Certain computing environments may require other
      certification, such as that supplied by TEMPEST, which guards against electronic
      eavesdropping. For example, a TEMPEST-certified system has terminals that
      are shielded to prevent electromagnetic fields from escaping. This shielding
      ensures that equipment outside the room or building where the terminal is
      housed cannot detect what information is being displayed by the terminal.
15.9  