Types of Virtual Machines and Their Implementations
      virtualized resource, then control is passed to the VMM to manage that inter-
      action. The functionality in Intel VT-x is similar, providing root and nonroot
      modes, equivalent to host and guest modes. Both provide guest VCPU state
      data structures to load and save guest CPU state automatically during guest
      context switches. In addition, virtual machine control structures (VMCSs) are
      provided to manage guest and host state, as well as the various guest execution
      controls, exit controls, and information about why guests exit back to the host.
      In the latter case, for example, a nested page-table violation caused by an
      attempt to access unavailable memory can result in the guest's exit.
      AMD and Intel have also addressed memory management in the virtual
      environment. With AMD's RVI and Intel's EPT memory management enhance-
      ments, VMMs no longer need to implement software NPTs. In essence, these
      CPUs implement nested page tables in hardware to allow the VMM to fully
      control paging while the CPUs accelerate the translation from virtual to physical
      addresses. The NPTs add a new layer, one representing the guest's view of
      logical-to-physical address translation. The CPU page-table walking function
      includes this new layer as necessary, walking through the guest table to the
      VMM table to find the physical address desired. A TLB miss results in a per-
      formance penalty, because more tables must be traversed (the guest and host
      page tables) to complete the lookup. Figure 16.4 shows the extra translation
      work performed by the hardware to translate from a guest virtual address to a
      final physical address.
      I/O is another area improved by hardware assistance. Consider that the
      standard direct-memory-access (DMA) controller accepts a target memory
      address and a source I/O device and transfers data between the two without
      operating-system action. Without hardware assistance, a guest might try to set
      up a DMA transfer that affects the memory of the VMM or other guests. In CPUs
      that provide hardware-assisted DMA (such as Intel CPUs with VT-d), even DMA
      has a level of indirection. First, the VMM sets up protection domains to tell
      the CPU which physical memory belongs to each guest. Next, it assigns the
      I/O devices to the protection domains, allowing them direct access to those
      memory regions and only those regions. The hardware then transforms the
      address in a DMA request issued by an I/O device to the host physical memory
      address associated with the I/O. In this manner DMA transfers are passed
      through between a guest and a device without VMM interference.
      Similarly,  interrupts   must  be  delivered  to  the  appropriate    guest          and
      must not be visible to other guests. By providing an interrupt remapping
      feature, CPUs with virtualization hardware assistance automatically deliver an
      interrupt destined for a guest to a core that is currently running a thread of that
      guest. That way, the guest receives interrupts without the VMM's needing to
      intercede in their delivery. Without interrupt remapping, malicious guests can
      generate interrupts that can be used to gain control of the host system. (See the
      bibliographical notes at the end of this chapter for more details.)
16.5  