Examples
      address--the hardware networking address--can move between systems.
      Before virtualization, this did not happen, as the MAC address was tied to
      physical hardware. With virtualization, the MAC must be movable for exist-
      ing networking connections to continue without resetting. Modern network
      switches understand this and route traffic wherever the MAC address is, even
      accommodating a move.
          A limitation of live migration is that no disk state is transferred. One reason
      live migration is possible is that most of the guest's state is maintained within
      the guest--for example, open file tables, system-call state, kernel state, and so
      on. Because disk I/O is so much slower than memory access, and used disk
      space is usually much larger than used memory, disks associated with the guest
      cannot be moved as part of a live migration. Rather, the disk must be remote to
      the guest, accessed over the network. In that case, disk access state is maintained
      within the guest, and network connections are all that matter to the VMM. The
      network connections are maintained during the migration, so remote disk
      access continues. Typically, NFS, CIFS, or iSCSI is used to store virtual machine
      images and any other storage a guest needs access to. Those network-based
      storage accesses simply continue when the network connections are continued
      once the guest has been migrated.
          Live  migration    enables   entirely  new  ways    of  managing  data    centers.
      For example, virtualization management tools can monitor all the VMMs in
      an environment and automatically balance resource use by moving guests
      between the VMMs. They can also optimize the use of electricity and cooling
      by migrating all guests off selected servers if other servers can handle the load
      and powering down the selected servers entirely. If the load increases, these
      tools can power up the servers and migrate guests back to them.
16.7  