Advantages of Distributed Systems
      A distributed system is a collection of loosely coupled nodes interconnected
      by a communication network. From the point of view of a specific node in
      a distributed system, the rest of the nodes and their respective resources are
      remote, whereas its own resources are local.
      The nodes in a distributed system may vary in size and function. They may
      include small microprocessors, personal computers, and large general-purpose
      computer systems. These processors are referred to by a number of names, such
      as processors, sites, machines, and hosts, depending on the context in which they
      are mentioned. We mainly use site to indicate the location of a machine and node
      to refer to a specific system at a site. Generally, one node at one site, the server,
      has a resource that another node at another site, the client (or user), would like
      to use. A general structure of a distributed system is shown in Figure 17.1.
      There are four major reasons for building distributed systems: resource
      sharing, computation speedup, reliability, and communication. In this section,
      we briefly discuss each of them.
                                                                                             741



742  Chapter   17  Distributed  Systems
                   site A                                           site C
                   server
                                             network                resources
               communication
                                             client
                                             site B
                                Figure 17.1  A distributed system.
     17.1.1    Resource Sharing
     If a number of different sites (with different capabilities) are connected to one
     another, then a user at one site may be able to use the resources available at
     another. For example, a user at site A may be using a laser printer located at
     site B. Meanwhile, a user at B may access a file that resides at A. In general,
     resource sharing in a distributed system provides mechanisms for sharing
     files at remote sites, processing information in a distributed database, printing
     files at remote sites, using remote specialized hardware devices (such as a
     supercomputer), and performing other operations.
     17.1.2    Computation Speedup
     If a particular computation can be partitioned into subcomputations that
     can  run  concurrently,    then  a  distributed  system        allows  us  to  distribute
     the subcomputations among the various sites. The subcomputations can be
     run concurrently and thus provide computation speedup. In addition, if a
     particular site is currently overloaded with jobs, some of them can be moved
     to other, lightly loaded sites. This movement of jobs is called load sharing or
     job migration. Automated load sharing, in which the distributed operating
     system automatically moves jobs, is not yet common in commercial systems.
     17.1.3    Reliability
     If one site fails in a distributed system, the remaining sites can continue
     operating, giving the system better reliability. If the system is composed of
     multiple large autonomous installations (that is, general-purpose computers),
     the failure of one of them should not affect the rest. If, however, the system
     is composed of small machines, each of which is responsible for some crucial
     system function (such as the web server or the file system), then a single
     failure may halt the operation of the whole system. In general, with enough
