Types of Network-based Operating Systems
      redundancy (in both hardware and data), the system can continue operation,
      even if some of its sites have failed.
      The failure of a site must be detected by the system, and appropriate action
      may be needed to recover from the failure. The system must no longer use the
      services of that site. In addition, if the function of the failed site can be taken
      over by another site, the system must ensure that the transfer of function occurs
      correctly. Finally, when the failed site recovers or is repaired, mechanisms must
      be available to integrate it back into the system smoothly.
      17.1.4   Communication
      When several sites are connected to one another by a communication network,
      users at the various sites have the opportunity to exchange information. At
      a low level, messages are passed between systems, much as messages are
      passed between processes in the single-computer message system discussed
      in Section 3.4. Given message passing, all the higher-level functionality found
      in standalone systems can be expanded to encompass the distributed system.
      Such functions include file transfer, login, mail, and remote procedure calls
      (RPCs).
      The      advantage   of  a  distributed  system  is  that  these  functions  can     be
      carried out over great distances. Two people at geographically distant sites can
      collaborate on a project, for example. By transferring the files of the project,
      logging in to each other's remote systems to run programs, and exchanging
      mail to coordinate the work, users minimize the limitations inherent in long-
      distance work. We wrote this book by collaborating in such a manner.
      The advantages of distributed systems have resulted in an industry-wide
      trend toward downsizing. Many companies are replacing their mainframes
      with networks of workstations or personal computers. Companies get a bigger
      bang for the buck (that is, better functionality for the cost), more flexibility in
      locating resources and expanding facilities, better user interfaces, and easier
      maintenance.
17.2  