An Example: TCP/IP
      We now return to the name-resolution issue raised in Section 17.4.1 and
      examine its operation with respect to the TCP/IP protocol stack on the Internet.
      Then we consider the processing needed to transfer a packet between hosts
      on different Ethernet networks. We base our description on the IPV4 protocols,
      which are the type most commonly used today.
      In a TCP/IP network, every host has a name and an associated IP address
      (or host-id). Both of these strings must be unique; and so that the name space
      can be managed, they are segmented. The name is hierarchical (as explained
      in Section 17.4.1), describing the host name and then the organization with
      which the host is associated. The host-id is split into a network number and a
      host number. The proportion of the split varies, depending on the size of the
      network. Once the Internet administrators assign a network number, the site
      with that number is free to assign host-ids.
      The sending system checks its routing tables to locate a router to send the
      frame on its way. The routers use the network part of the host-id to transfer
      the packet from its source network to the destination network. The destination
      system then receives the packet. The packet may be a complete message, or it
      may just be a component of a message, with more packets needed before the
      message can be reassembled and passed to the TCP/UDP layer for transmission
      to the destination process.
      Within a network, how does a packet move from sender (host or router) to
      receiver? Every Ethernet device has a unique byte number, called the medium
      access control (MAC) address, assigned to it for addressing. Two devices on a
      LAN communicate with each other only with this number. If a system needs
      to send data to another system, the networking software generates an address
      resolution protocol (ARP) packet containing the IP address of the destination
      system. This packet is broadcast to all other systems on that Ethernet network.
      A  broadcast  uses  a        special  network  address  (usually,  the  maximum
      address) to signal that all hosts should receive and process the packet. The
      broadcast is not re-sent by gateways, so only systems on the local network
      receive it. Only the system whose IP address matches the IP address of the ARP
      request responds and sends back its MAC address to the system that initiated
      the query. For efficiency, the host caches the IP­ MAC address pair in an internal
      table. The cache entries are aged, so that an entry is eventually removed from
      the cache if an access to that system is not required within a given time. In



                                           17.6  