Robustness
      A distributed system may suffer from various types of hardware failure. The
      failure of a link, the failure of a site, and the loss of a message are the most
      common types. To ensure that the system is robust, we must detect any of these
      failures, reconfigure the system so that computation can continue, and recover
      when a site or a link is repaired.
      17.7.1  Failure Detection
      In  an  environment  with  no       shared  memory,  we   are  generally  unable      to
      differentiate among link failure, site failure, and message loss. We can usually
      detect only that one of these failures has occurred. Once a failure has been
      detected, appropriate action must be taken. What action is appropriate depends
      on the particular application.
          To detect link and site failure, we use a heartbeat procedure. Suppose that
      sites A and B have a direct physical link between them. At fixed intervals, the
      sites send each other an I-am-up message. If site A does not receive this message
      within a predetermined time period, it can assume that site B has failed, that
      the link between A and B has failed, or that the message from B has been lost.
      At this point, site A has two choices. It can wait for another time period to
      receive an I-am-up message from B, or it can send an Are-you-up? message to B.
          If time goes by and site A still has not received an I-am-up message, or if site
      A has sent an Are-you-up? message and has not received a reply, the procedure
      can be repeated. Again, the only conclusion that site A can draw safely is that
      some type of failure has occurred.
          Site A can try to differentiate between link failure and site failure by sending
      an Are-you-up? message to B by another route (if one exists). If and when B
      receives this message, it immediately replies positively. This positive reply tells
      A that B is up and that the failure is in the direct link between them. Since we
      do not know in advance how long it will take the message to travel from A to B
      and back, we must use a time-out scheme. At the time A sends the Are-you-up?
      message, it specifies a time interval during which it is willing to wait for the
      reply from B. If A receives the reply message within that time interval, then it
      can safely conclude that B is up. If not, however (that is, if a time-out occurs),
      then A may conclude only that one or more of the following situations has
      occurred:
      路   Site B is down.
      路   The direct link (if one exists) from A to B is down.
      路   The alternative path from A to B is down.
      路   The message has been lost.
      Site A cannot, however, determine which of these events has occurred.
      17.7.2     Reconfiguration
      Suppose that site A has discovered, through the mechanism just described,
      that a failure has occurred. It must then initiate a procedure that will allow the
      system to reconfigure and to continue its normal mode of operation.



                                                       17.7  