Operating-System Services
     An operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs.
     It provides certain services to programs and to the users of those programs.
     The specific services provided, of course, differ from one operating system to
     another, but we can identify common classes. These operating system services
     are provided for the convenience of the programmer, to make the programming
                                                                                         55



56  Chapter    2  Operating-System Structures
                                                 user and other system programs
                                                 GUI           batch         command  line
                                                            user interfaces
                                                            system calls
               program               I/O              file     communication                resource              accounting
               execution             operations       systems                               allocation
                          error                                                                         protection
                          detection                                                                     and
                                                               services                                 security
                                                      operating system
                                                               hardware
                          Figure 2.1             A view of operating system services.
    task easier. Figure 2.1 shows one view of the various operating-system services
    and how they interrelate.
       One set of operating system services provides functions that are helpful to
    the user.
    路  User interface. Almost all operating systems have a user interface (UI).
       This interface can take several forms. One is a command-line interface
       (CLI), which uses text commands and a method for entering them (say,
       a keyboard for typing in commands in a specific format with specific
       options). Another is a batch interface, in which commands and directives
       to control those commands are entered into files, and those files are
       executed. Most commonly, a graphical user interface (GUI) is used. Here,
       the interface is a window system with a pointing device to direct I/O,
       choose from menus, and make selections and a keyboard to enter text.
       Some systems provide two or all three of these variations.
    路  Program execution. The system must be able to load a program into
       memory and to run that program. The program must be able to end its
       execution, either normally or abnormally (indicating error).
    路  I/O operations. A running program may require I/O, which may involve a
       file or an I/O device. For specific devices, special functions may be desired
       (such as recording to a CD or DVD drive or blanking a display screen). For
       efficiency and protection, users usually cannot control I/O devices directly.
       Therefore, the operating system must provide a means to do I/O.
    路  File-system manipulation. The file system is of particular interest. Obvi-
       ously, programs need to read and write files and directories. They also
       need to create and delete them by name, search for a given file, and
       list file information. Finally, some operating systems include permissions
       management to allow or deny access to files or directories based on file
       ownership. Many operating systems provide a variety of file systems,
       sometimes to allow personal choice and sometimes to provide specific
       features or performance characteristics.



                                           2.1  