Linux History
      Linux  looks  and  feels  much  like  any  other   UNIX  system;   indeed,  UNIX
      compatibility has been a major design goal of the Linux project. However,
      Linux is much younger than most UNIX systems. Its development began in
      1991, when a Finnish university student, Linus Torvalds, began developing
      a small but self-contained kernel for the 80386 processor, the first true 32-bit
      processor in Intel's range of PC-compatible CPUs.
                                                                                        781



782  Chapter 18    The Linux System
          Early in its development, the Linux source code was made available free--
     both at no cost and with minimal distributional restrictions--on the Internet.
     As a result, Linux's history has been one of collaboration by many developers
     from all around the world, corresponding almost exclusively over the Internet.
     From an initial kernel that partially implemented a small subset of the UNIX
     system services, the Linux system has grown to include all of the functionality
     expected of a modern UNIX system.
          In its early days, Linux development revolved largely around the central
     operating-system    kernel -- the   core,  privileged   executive   that   manages   all
     system   resources  and  interacts  directly      with  the  computer  hardware.     We
     need much more than this kernel, of course, to produce a full operating
     system. We thus need to make a distinction between the Linux kernel and
     a complete Linux system. The Linux kernel is an original piece of software
     developed from scratch by the Linux community. The Linux system, as we
     know it today, includes a multitude of components, some written from scratch,
     others borrowed from other development projects, and still others created in
     collaboration with other teams.
          The basic Linux system is a standard environment for applications and
     user programming, but it does not enforce any standard means of managing
     the available functionality as a whole. As Linux has matured, a need has arisen
     for another layer of functionality on top of the Linux system. This need has
     been met by various Linux distributions. A Linux distribution includes all the
     standard components of the Linux system, plus a set of administrative tools
     to simplify the initial installation and subsequent upgrading of Linux and to
     manage installation and removal of other packages on the system. A modern
     distribution  also  typically  includes    tools  for   management     of  file  systems,
     creation and management of user accounts, administration of networks, Web
     browsers, word processors, and so on.
     18.1.1   The Linux Kernel
     The first Linux kernel released to the public was version 0.01, dated May 14,
     1991. It had no networking, ran only on 80386-compatible Intel processors
     and  PC  hardware,  and  had     extremely    limited   device-driver      support.  The
     virtual memory subsystem was also fairly basic and included no support
     for memory-mapped files; however, even this early incarnation supported
     shared pages with copy-on-write and protected address spaces. The only file
     system supported was the Minix file system, as the first Linux kernels were
     cross-developed on a Minix platform.
          The next milestone, Linux 1.0, was released on March 14, 1994. This release
     culminated three years of rapid development of the Linux kernel. Perhaps the
     single biggest new feature was networking: 1.0 included support for UNIX's
     standard TCP/IP networking protocols, as well as a BSD-compatible socket
     interface for networking programming. Device-driver support was added for
     running IP over Ethernet or (via the PPP or SLIP protocols) over serial lines or
     modems.
          The 1.0 kernel also included a new, much enhanced file system without the
     limitations of the original Minix file system, and it supported a range of SCSI
     controllers for high-performance disk access. The developers extended the vir-
     tual memory subsystem to support paging to swap files and memory mapping



                                                     18.1  