Design Principles
      system perspective, but machine-virtualization technologies are now becoming
      the dominant way of running multiple operating systems on a single machine.
      Windows 7 is a multiuser operating system, supporting simultaneous
      access through distributed services or through multiple instances of the GUI
      via the Windows terminal services. The server editions of Windows 7 support
      simultaneous terminal server sessions from Windows desktop systems. The
      desktop  editions  of  terminal  server  multiplex  the   keyboard,  mouse,       and
      monitor between virtual terminal sessions for each logged-on user. This feature,
      called fast user switching, allows users to preempt each other at the console of
      a PC without having to log off and log on.
      We noted earlier that some GUI implementation moved into kernel mode
      in Windows NT 4.0. It started to move into user mode again with Windows
      Vista, which included the desktop window manager (DWM) as a user-mode
      process. DWM implements the desktop compositing of Windows, providing
      the Windows Aero interface look on top of the Windows DirectX graphic
      software. DirectX continues to run in the kernel, as does the code implementing
      Windows'  previous     windowing  and    graphics   models  (Win32k  and  GDI).
      Windows 7 made substantial changes to the DWM, significantly reducing its
      memory footprint and improving its performance.
      Windows XP was the first version of Windows to ship a 64-bit version (for
      the IA64 in 2001 and the AMD64 in 2005). Internally, the native NT file system
      (NTFS) and many of the Win32 APIs have always used 64-bit integers where
      appropriate --so the major extension to 64-bit in Windows XP was support
      for large virtual addresses. However, 64-bit editions of Windows also support
      much larger physical memories. By the time Windows 7 shipped, the AMD64 ISA
      had become available on almost all CPUs from both Intel and AMD. In addition,
      by that time, physical memories on client systems frequently exceeded the
      4-GB limit of the IA-32. As a result, the 64-bit version of Windows 7 is now
      commonly installed on larger client systems. Because the AMD64 architecture
      supports high-fidelity IA-32 compatibility at the level of individual processes,
      32- and 64-bit applications can be freely mixed in a single system.
      In the rest of our description of Windows 7, we will not distinguish between
      the client editions of Windows 7 and the corresponding server editions. They
      are based on the same core components and run the same binary files for
      the kernel and most drivers. Similarly, although Microsoft ships a variety of
      different editions of each release to address different market price points, few
      of the differences between editions are reflected in the core of the system. In
      this chapter, we focus primarily on the core components of Windows 7.
19.2  