Terminal Services and Fast User Switching
      Windows supports a GUI-based console that interfaces with the user via
      keyboard, mouse, and display. Most systems also support audio and video.
      Audio input is used by Windows voice-recognition software; voice recognition
      makes the system more convenient and increases its accessibility for users with
      disabilities. Windows 7 added support for multi-touch hardware, allowing
      users to input data by touching the screen and making gestures with one or
      more fingers. Eventually, the video-input capability, which is currently used
      for communication applications, is likely to be used for visually interpreting
      gestures, as Microsoft has demonstrated for its Xbox 360 Kinect product. Other
      future input experiences may evolve from Microsoft's surface computer. Most
      often installed at public venues, such as hotels and conference centers, the
      surface computer is a table surface with special cameras underneath. It can
      track the actions of multiple users at once and recognize objects that are placed
      on top.
         The PC was, of course, envisioned as a personal computer --an inherently
      single-user machine. Modern Windows, however, supports the sharing of a PC
      among multiple users. Each user that is logged on using the GUI has a session
      created to represent the GUI environment he will be using and to contain all the
      processes created to run his applications. Windows allows multiple sessions to
      exist at the same time on a single machine. However, Windows only supports
      a single console, consisting of all the monitors, keyboards, and mice connected
      to the PC. Only one session can be connected to the console at a time. From the
      logon screen displayed on the console, users can create new sessions or attach
      to an existing session that was previously created. This allows multiple users
      to share a single PC without having to log off and on between users. Microsoft
      calls this use of sessions fast user switching.
