IBM OS/360
      venient and practical mode of computing. One result of CTSS was increased
      development of time-sharing systems. Another result was the development of
      MULTICS.
20.8  MULTICS
      The MULTICS operating system was designed from 1965 to 1970 at MIT as a
      natural extension of CTSS. CTSS and other early time-sharing systems were so
      successful that they created an immediate desire to proceed quickly to bigger
      and better systems. As larger computers became available, the designers of
      CTSS set out to create a time-sharing utility. Computing service would be
      provided like electrical power. Large computer systems would be connected
      by telephone wires to terminals in offices and homes throughout a city. The
      operating system would be a time-shared system running continuously with a
      vast file system of shared programs and data.
      MULTICS   was  designed   by   a  team  from   MIT,  GE    (which  later  sold      its
      computer department to Honeywell), and Bell Laboratories (which dropped
      out of the project in 1969). The basic GE 635 computer was modified to a
      new computer system called the GE 645, mainly by the addition of paged-
      segmentation memory hardware.
      In MULTICS, a virtual address was composed of an 18-bit segment number
      and a 16-bit word offset. The segments were then paged in 1-KB-word pages.
      The second-chance page-replacement algorithm was used.
      The segmented virtual address space was merged into the file system; each
      segment was a file. Segments were addressed by the name of the file. The file
      system itself was a multilevel tree structure, allowing users to create their own
      subdirectory structures.
      Like CTSS, MULTICS used a multilevel feedback queue for CPU scheduling.
      Protection was accomplished through an access list associated with each file
      and a set of protection rings for executing processes. The system, which was
      written almost entirely in PL/1, comprised about 300,000 lines of code. It was
      extended to a multiprocessor system, allowing a CPU to be taken out of service
      for maintenance while the system continued running.
20.9  