RESEARCH ON OPERATING SYSTEMS
      Computer science is a rapidly advancing field and it is hard to predict where it
is going. Researchers at universities and industrial research labs are constantly
thinking up new ideas, some of which go nowhere but some of which become the
cornerstone of future products and have massive impact on the industry and users.
Telling which is which turns out to be easier to do in hindsight than in real time.
Separating the wheat from the chaff is especially difficult because it often takes 20
to 30 years from idea to impact.
      For example, when President Eisenhower set up the Dept. of Defense's Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in 1958, he was trying to keep the
Army from killing the Navy and the Air Force over the Pentagon's research bud-
get.  He was not trying to invent the Internet.  But one of the things ARPA did was
fund some university research on the then-obscure concept of packet switching,
which led to the first experimental packet-switched network, the ARPANET.               It
went live in 1969.  Before long, other ARPA-funded research networks were con-
nected to the ARPANET, and the Internet was born. The Internet was then happily
used by academic researchers for sending email to each other for 20 years.             In the
early 1990s, Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web at the CERN research
lab in Geneva and Marc Andreesen wrote a graphical browser for it at the Univer-
sity of Illinois. All of a sudden the Internet was full of twittering teenagers.       Presi-
dent Eisenhower is probably rolling over in his grave.
      Research in operating systems has also led to dramatic changes in practical
systems.  As we discussed earlier, the first commercial computer systems were all
batch   systems,   until  M.I.T.  invented  general-purpose  timesharing  in      the  early
1960s.    Computers were all text-based until Doug Engelbart invented the mouse
and the graphical user interface at Stanford Research Institute in the late 1960s.
Who knows what will come next?
      In this section and in comparable sections throughout the book, we will take a
brief look at some of the research in operating systems that has taken place during
