FILE-SYSTEM MANAGEMENT AND OPTIMIZATION
Making the file system work is one thing; making it work efficiently and
robustly in real life is something quite different.  In the following sections we will
look at some of the issues involved in managing disks.



300                              FILE SYSTEMS                               CHAP. 4
4.4.1 Disk-Space Management
     Files are normally stored on disk, so management of disk space is a major con-
cern to file-system designers. Two general strategies are possible for storing an n
byte file: n consecutive bytes of disk space are allocated, or the file is split up into
a number of (not necessarily) contiguous blocks. The same trade-off is present in
memory-management systems between pure segmentation and paging.
     As we have seen, storing a file as a contiguous sequence of bytes has the ob-
vious problem that if a file grows, it may have to be moved on the disk. The same
problem holds for segments in memory, except that moving a segment in memory
is a relatively fast operation compared to moving a file from one disk position to
another. For this reason, nearly all file systems chop files up into fixed-size blocks
that need not be adjacent.
Block Size
     Once it has been decided to store files in fixed-size blocks, the question arises
how big the block should be. Given the way disks are organized, the sector, the
track, and the cylinder are obvious candidates for the unit of allocation (although
these are all device dependent, which is a minus).  In a paging system, the page
size is also a major contender.
     Having a large block size means that every file, even a 1-byte file, ties up an
entire cylinder.  It also means that small files waste a large amount of disk space.
On the other hand, a small block size means that most files will span multiple
blocks and thus need multiple seeks and rotational delays to read them, reducing
performance. Thus if the allocation unit is too large, we waste space; if it is too
small, we waste time.
     Making a good choice requires having some information about the file-size
distribution.  Tanenbaum et al. (2006) studied the file-size distribution in the Com-
puter Science Department of a large research university (the VU) in 1984 and then
again in 2005, as well as on a commercial Web server hosting a political Website
(www.electoral-vote.com).   The results are shown in Fig. 4-20, where for each
power-of-two file size, the percentage of all files smaller or equal to it is listed for
each of the three data sets. For example, in 2005, 59.13% of all files at the VU
were 4 KB or smaller and 90.84% of all files were 64 KB or smaller. The median
file size was 2475 bytes. Some people may find this small size surprising.
     What conclusions can we draw from these data?  For one thing, with a block
size of 1 KB, only about 30­50% of all files fit in a single block, whereas with a
4-KB block, the percentage of files that fit in one block goes up to the 60­70%
range. Other data in the paper show that with a 4-KB block, 93% of the disk blocks
are used by the 10% largest files. This means that wasting some space at the end of
each small file hardly matters because the disk is filled up by a small number of



SEC. 4.4  