WHAT IS AN OPERATING SYSTEM?
system (such as the file system) run in user space.      In such systems, it is difficult to
draw a clear boundary.     Everything running in kernel mode is clearly part of the
operating system, but some programs running outside it are arguably also part of it,
or at least closely associated with it.
Operating systems differ from user (i.e., application) programs in ways other
than where they reside. In particular, they are huge, complex, and long-lived. The
source code of the heart of an operating system like Linux or Windows is on the
order of five million lines of code or more.  To conceive of what this means, think
of printing out five million lines in book form, with 50 lines per page and 1000
pages per volume (larger than this book). It would take 100 volumes to list an op-
erating system of this size--essentially an entire bookcase. Can you imagine get-
ting a job maintaining an operating system and on the first day having your boss
bring you to a bookcase with the code and say: ``Go learn that.'' And this is only
for the part that runs in the kernel.     When essential shared libraries are included,
Windows is well over 70 million lines of code or 10 to 20 bookcases. And this
excludes  basic  application  software    (things  like  Windows  Explorer,  Windows
Media Player, and so on).
It should be clear now why operating systems live a long time--they are very
hard to write, and having written one, the owner is loath to throw it out and start
again. Instead, such systems evolve over long periods of time.    Windows 95/98/Me
was basically one operating system and Windows NT/2000/XP/Vista/Windows 7 is
a different one. They look similar to the users because Microsoft made very sure
that the user interface of Windows 2000/XP/Vista/Windows 7 was quite similar to
that of the system it was replacing, mostly Windows 98.  Nevertheless, there were
very good reasons why Microsoft got rid of Windows 98. We will come to these
when we study Windows in detail in Chap. 11.
Besides Windows, the other main example we will use throughout this book is
UNIX and its variants and clones. It, too, has evolved over the years, with versions
like System V, Solaris, and FreeBSD being derived from the original system,
whereas Linux is a fresh code base, although very closely modeled on UNIX and
highly compatible with it. We will use examples from UNIX throughout this book
and look at Linux in detail in Chap. 10.
In this chapter we will briefly touch on a number of key aspects of operating
systems, including what they are, their history, what kinds are around, some of the
basic concepts, and their structure. We will come back to many of these important
topics in later chapters in more detail.
1.1 