DISKS
Now we will begin studying some real I/O devices.      We will begin with disks,
which are conceptually simple, yet very important.     After that we will examine
clocks, keyboards, and displays.
5.4.1 Disk Hardware
Disks come in a variety of types. The most common ones are the magnetic
hard disks.  They are characterized by the fact that reads and writes are equally
fast, which makes them suitable as secondary memory (paging, file systems, etc.).
Arrays of these disks are sometimes used to provide highly reliable storage. For
distribution of programs, data, and movies, optical disks (DVDs and Blu-ray) are
also important. Finally, solid-state disks are increasingly popular as they are fast
and do not contain moving parts.  In the following sections we will discuss mag-
netic disks as an example of the hardware and then describe the software for disk
devices in general.
Magnetic Disks
Magnetic disks are organized into cylinders, each one containing as many
tracks as there are heads stacked vertically. The tracks are divided into sectors,
with the number of sectors around the circumference typically being 8 to 32 on
floppy disks, and up to several hundred on hard disks. The number of heads varies
from 1 to about 16.
Older disks have little electronics and just deliver a simple serial bit stream.
On these disks, the controller does most of the work.  On other disks, in particular,
IDE (Integrated Drive Electronics) and SATA (Serial ATA) disks, the disk drive
itself contains a microcontroller that does considerable work and allows the real
controller to issue a set of higher-level commands. The controller often does track
caching, bad-block remapping, and much more.
A device feature that has important implications for the disk driver is the possi-
bility of a controller doing seeks on two or more drives at the same time. These are
known as overlapped seeks.        While the controller and software are waiting for a
seek to complete on one drive, the controller can initiate a seek on another drive.
Many controllers can also read or write on one drive while seeking on one or more
other drives, but a floppy disk controller cannot read or write on two drives at the



370                                INPUT/OUTPUT                                        CHAP. 5
same time. (Reading or writing requires the controller to move bits on a microsec-
ond time scale, so one transfer uses up most of its computing power.)                  The situa-
tion is different for hard disks with integrated controllers, and in a system with
more than one of these hard drives they can operate simultaneously, at least to the
extent of transferring between the disk and the controller's buffer memory. Only
one transfer between the controller and the main memory is possible at once, how-
ever. The ability to perform two or more operations at the same time can reduce the
average access time considerably.
     Figure 5-18 compares parameters of the standard storage medium for the origi-
nal IBM PC with parameters of a disk made three decades later to show how much
disks changed in that time. It is interesting to note that not all parameters have im-
proved as much.    Average seek time is almost 9 times better than it was, transfer
rate is 16,000 times better, while capacity is up by a factor of 800,000. This pattern
has to do with relatively gradual improvements in the moving parts, but much
higher bit densities on the recording surfaces.
        Parameter                  IBM 360-KB floppy disk           WD 3000 HLFS hard disk
Number of cylinders                   40                            36,481
Tracks per cylinder                   2                             255
Sectors per track                     9                                63 (avg)
Sectors per disk                      720                           586,072,368
Bytes per sector                      512                           512
Disk capacity                         360 KB                        300 GB
Seek time (adjacent cylinders)        6 msec                           0.7 msec
Seek time (average case)              77 msec                          4.2 msec
Rotation time                         200 msec                         6 msec
Time to transfer 1 sector             22 msec                          1.4 sec
        Figure 5-18. Disk parameters for the original IBM PC 360-KB floppy disk and a
        Western Digital WD 3000 HLFS (``Velociraptor'') hard disk.
     One thing to be aware of in looking at the specifications of modern hard disks
is that the geometry specified, and used by the driver software, is almost always
different from the physical format.   On old disks, the number of sectors per track
was the same for all cylinders. Modern disks are divided into zones with more sec-
tors on the outer zones than the inner ones. Fig. 5-19(a) illustrates a tiny disk with
two zones. The outer zone has 32 sectors per track; the inner one has 16 sectors per
track.  A real disk, such as the WD 3000 HLFS, typically has 16 or more zones,
with the number of sectors increasing by about 4% per zone as one goes out from
the innermost to the outermost zone.
     To hide the details of how many sectors each track has, most modern disks
have a virtual geometry that is presented to the operating system. The software is
instructed to act as though there are x cylinders, y heads, and z sectors per track.



SEC.    5.4                                                            