USER INTERFACES: KEYBOARD, MOUSE, MONITOR
     Every general-purpose computer has a keyboard and monitor (and sometimes a
mouse) to allow people to interact with it. Although the keyboard and monitor are
technically separate devices, they work closely together. On mainframes, there are
frequently many remote users, each with a device containing a keyboard and an at-
tached display as a unit. These devices have historically been called terminals.
People frequently still use that term, even when discussing personal computer
keyboards and monitors (mostly for lack of a better term).
5.6.1 Input Software
     User input comes primarily from the keyboard and mouse (or somtimes touch
screens), so let us look at those. On a personal computer, the keyboard contains an
embedded      microprocessor  which  usually     communicates      through    a  specialized
serial  port  with  a  controller  chip      on  the  parentboard  (although     increasingly
keyboards are connected to a USB port).          An interrupt is generated whenever a key
is struck and a second one is generated whenever a key is released.              At each of
these keyboard interrupts, the keyboard driver extracts the information about what
happens from the I/O port associated with the keyboard. Everything else happens
in software and is pretty much independent of the hardware.
     Most of the rest of this section can be best understood when thinking of typing
commands to a shell window (command-line interface).         This is how programmers
commonly work.      We will discuss graphical interfaces below. Some devices, in
particular touch screens, are used for input and output. We have made an (arbi-
trary) choice to discuss them in the section on output devices.       We will discuss
graphical interfaces later in this chapter.
Keyboard Software
     The number in the I/O register is the key number, called the scan code, not the
ASCII code. Normal keyboards have fewer than 128 keys, so only 7 bits are need-
ed to represent the key number.    The eighth bit is set to 0 on a key press and to 1 on



SEC. 5.6        