CLOUDS
Virtualization technology played a crucial role in the dizzying rise of cloud
computing. There are many clouds. Some clouds are public and available to any-
one willing to pay for the use of resources, others are private to an organization.
Likewise, different clouds offer different things. Some give their users access to
physical hardware, but most virtualize their environments. Some offer the bare ma-
chines, virtual or not, and nothing more, but others offer software that is ready to
use and can be combined in interesting ways, or platforms that make it easy for
their users to develop new services. Cloud providers typically offer different cate-
gories of resources, such as ``big machines'' versus ``little machines,'' etc.
For all the talk about clouds, few people seem really sure about what they are
exactly. The National Institute of Standards and Technology, always a good source
to fall back on, lists five essential characteristics:
1.  On-demand  self-service.     Users  should          be  able  to  provision  re-
    sources automatically, without requiring human interaction.
2.  Broad network access.        All these resources should be available over
    the network via standard mechanisms so that heterogeneous devices
    can make use of them.
3.  Resource pooling.      The computing resource owned by the provider
    should be pooled to serve multiple users and with the ability to assign
    and reassign resources dynamically. The users generally do not even
    know the exact location of ``their'' resources or even which country
    they are located in.
4.  Rapid elasticity.      It should be possible to acquire and release re-
    sources elastically, perhaps even automatically, to scale immediately
    with the users' demands.
5.  Measured service. The cloud provider meters the resources used in a
    way that matches the type of service agreed upon.



496                  VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD                         CHAP. 7
7.11.1 Clouds as a Service
     In this section, we will look at clouds with a focus on virtualization and operat-
ing systems. Specifically, we consider clouds that offer direct access to a virtual
machine, which the user can use in any way he sees fit. Thus, the same cloud may
run different operating systems, possibly on the same hardware.           In cloud terms,
this is known as IAAS (Infrastructure As A Service), as opposed to PAAS (Plat-
form As A Service, which delivers an environment that includes things such as a
specific OS, database, Web server, and so on), SAAS (Software As A Service,
which offers access to specific software, such as Microsoft Office 365, or Google
Apps), and many other types of as-a-service. One example of an IAAS cloud is
Amazon EC2, which happens to be based on the Xen hypervisor and counts multi-
ple hundreds of thousands of physical machines. Provided you have the cash, you
can have as much computing power as you need.
     Clouds can transform the way companies do computing. Overall, consolidating
the computing resources in a small number of places (conveniently located near a
power source and cheap cooling) benefits from economy of scale.           Outsourcing
your processing means that you need not worry so much about managing your IT
infrastructure, backups, maintenance, depreciation, scalability, reliability, perfor-
mance, and perhaps security. All of that is done in one place and, assuming the
cloud provider is competent, done well. You would think that IT managers are hap-
pier today than ten years ago. However, as these worries disappeared, new ones
emerged. Can you really trust your cloud provider to keep your sensitive data safe?
Will a competitor running on the same infrastructure be able to infer information
you wanted to keep private? What law(s) apply to your data (for instance, if the
cloud provider is from the United States, is your data subject to the PATRIOT Act,
even if your company is in Europe)?  Once you store all your data in cloud X, will
you be able to get them out again, or will you be tied to that cloud and its provider
forever, something known as vendor lock-in?
7.11.2 Virtual Machine Migration
     Virtualization technology not only allows IAAS clouds to run multiple dif-
ferent operating systems on the same hardware at the same time, it also permits
clever  management.  We  have  already  discussed       the  ability  to  overcommit     re-
sources, especially in combination with deduplication.       Now we will look at anoth-
er management issue: what if a machine needs servicing (or even replacement)
while it is running lots of important machines? Probably, clients will not be happy
if their systems go down because the cloud provider wants to replace a disk drive.
     Hypervisors decouple the virtual machine from the physical hardware. In other
words, it does not really matter to the virtual machine if it runs on this machine or
that machine. Thus, the administrator could simply shut down all the virtual ma-
chines and restart them again on a shiny new machine. Doing so, however, results



SEC. 7.11                            