CASE STUDY: VMWARE
     Since 1999, VMware, Inc. has been the leading commercial provider of virtu-
alization solutions with products for desktops, servers, the cloud, and now even on
cell phones.  It provides not only hypervisors but also the software that manages
virtual machines on a large scale.
     We will start this case study with a brief history of how the company got start-
ed. We will then describe VMware Workstation, a type 2 hypervisor and the com-
pany's first product, the challenges in its design and the key elements of the solu-
tion. We then describe the evolution of VMware Workstation over the years. We
conclude with a description of ESX Server, VMware's type 1 hypervisor.
7.12.1 The Early History of VMware
     Although the idea of using virtual machines was popular in the 1960s and
1970s in both the computing industry and academic research, interest in virtu-
alization was totally lost after the 1980s and the rise of the personal computer in-
dustry. Only IBM's mainframe division still cared about virtualization. Indeed, the
computer architectures designed at the time, and in particular Intel's x86 architec-
ture, did not provide architectural support for virtualization (i.e., they failed the
Popek/Goldberg criteria). This is extremely unfortunate, since the 386 CPU, a
complete redesign of the 286, was done a decade after the Popek-Goldberg paper,
and the designers should have known better.
     In 1997, at Stanford, three of the future founders of VMware had built a proto-
type hypervisor called Disco (Bugnion et al., 1997), with the goal of running com-
modity operating systems (in particular UNIX) on a very large scale multiproces-
sor then being developed at Stanford: the FLASH machine. During that project, the
authors realized that using virtual machines could solve, simply and elegantly, a
number of hard system software problems: rather than trying to solve these prob-
lems within existing operating systems, one could innovate in a layer below exist-
ing operating systems. The key observation of Disco was that, while the high com-
plexity of modern operating systems made innovation difficult, the relative simpli-
city of a virtual machine monitor and its position in the software stack provided a
powerful foothold to address limitations of operating systems. Although Disco was
aimed at very large servers, and designed for the MIPS architecture, the authors
realized that the same approach could equally apply, and be commercially relevant,
for the x86 marketplace.
     And so, VMware, Inc. was founded in 1998 with the goal of bringing virtu-
alization to the x86 architecture and the personal computer industry. VMware's
first product (VMware Workstation) was the first virtualization solution available
for 32-bit x86-based platforms. The product was first released in 1999, and came in
two variants: VMware Workstation for Linux, a type 2 hypervisor that ran on top
of Linux host operating systems, and VMware Workstation for Windows, which



SEC. 7.12                  