THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT
Phrased differently: while Camille may think she is the only user on the computer,
she really is not alone at all!
Attackers may launch exploits manually or automatically, by means of a virus
or a worm.      The difference between a virus and worm is not always very clear.
Most people agree that a virus needs at least some user interaction to propagate.
For instance, the user should click on an attachment to get infected. Worms, on the
other hand, are self propelled. They will propagate regardless of what the user
does. It is also possible that a user willingly installs the attacker's code herself. For
instance, the attacker may repackage popular but expensive software (like a game
or a word processor) and offer it for free on the Internet. For many users, ``free'' is
irresistible. However, installing the free game automatically also installs additional
functionality, the kind that hands over the PC and everything in it to a cybercrimi-
nal far away. Such software is known as a Trojan horse, a subject we will discuss
shortly.
To cover all the bases, this chapter has two main parts. It starts by looking at
the security landscape in detail. We will look at threats and attackers (Sec. 9.1), the
nature of security and attacks (Sec. 9.2), different approaches to provide access
control (Sec. 9.3), and security models (Sec. 9.4).  In addition, we will look at
cryptography as a core approach to help provide security (Sec. 9.5) and different
ways to perform authentication (Sec. 9.6).
So far, so good. Then reality kicks in. The next four major sections are practi-
cal security problems that occur in daily life. We will talk about the tricks that at-
tackers use to take control over a computer system, as well as counter measures to
prevent this from happening. We will also discuss insider attacks and various kinds
of digital pests. We conclude the chapter with a short discussion of ongoing re-
search on computer security and finally a short summary.
Also worth noting is that while this is a book on operating systems, operating
systems security and network security are so intertwined that it is really impossible
to separate them. For example, viruses come in over the network but affect the op-
erating system.  On the whole, we have tended to err on the side of caution and in-
cluded some material that is germane to the subject but not strictly an operating
systems issue.
9.1 