BASICS OF CRYPTOGRAPHY
Cryptography plays an important role in security. Many people are familiar
with newspaper cryptograms, which are little puzzles in which each letter has been
systematically replaced by a different one. These have as much to do with modern
cryptography as hot dogs have to do with haute cuisine. In this section we will give
a bird's-eye view of cryptography in the computer era. As mentioned earlier, oper-
ating systems use cryptography in many places. For instance, some file systems
can encrypt all the data on disk, protocols like IPSec may encrypt and/or sign all



620                            SECURITY                                         CHAP. 9
network packets, and most operating systems scramble passwords to prevent at-
tackers from recovering them. Moreover, in Sec. 9.6, we will discuss the role of en-
cryption in another important aspect of security: authentication.
     We will look at the basic primitives used by these systems. However, a serious
discussion of cryptography is beyond the scope of this book. Many excellent books
on computer security discuss the topic at length. The interested reader is referred to
these (e.g., Kaufman et al., 2002; and Gollman, 2011).      Below we will give a very
quick discussion of cryptography for readers not familiar with it at all.
     The purpose of cryptography is to take a message or file, called the plaintext,
and encrypt it into ciphertext in such a way that only authorized people know how
to convert it back to plaintext. For all others, the ciphertext is just an incomprehen-
sible pile of bits.   Strange as it may sound to beginners in the area, the encryption
and decryption algorithms (functions) should always be public. Trying to keep
them secret almost never works and gives the people trying to keep the secrets a
false sense of security. In the trade, this tactic is called security by obscurity and
is employed only by security amateurs. Oddly enough, the category of amateurs
also includes many huge multinational corporations that really should know better.
     Instead, the secrecy depends on parameters to the algorithms called keys.           If P
is the plaintext file, KE is the encryption key, C is the ciphertext, and E is the en-
cryption algorithm (i.e., function), then C  =  E(P, KE ).  This is the definition of en-
cryption. It says that the ciphertext is obtained by using the (known) encryption al-
gorithm, E, with the plaintext, P, and the (secret) encryption key, KE , as parame-
ters. The idea that the algorithms should all be public and the secrecy should reside
exclusively in the keys is called Kerckhoffs' principle, formulated by the 19th
century Dutch cryptographer Auguste Kerckoffs. All serious cryptographers sub-
scribe to this idea.
     Similarly, P = D(C, KD) where D is the decryption algorithm and KD is the
decryption key. This says that to get the plaintext, P, back from the ciphertext, C,
and the decryption key, KD, one runs the algorithm D with C and KD as parame-
ters. The relation between the various pieces is shown in Fig. 9-15.
9.5.1 Secret-Key Cryptography
     To make this clearer, consider an encryption algorithm in which each letter is
replaced by a different letter, for example, all As are replaced by Qs, all Bs are re-
placed by W s, all Cs are replaced by Es, and so on like this:
plaintext:            A B C D E F GH I J K LMNO P Q R S T UVWXY Z
ciphertext:           QWE R T YU I O PA S D F GH J K L Z X C V B NM
This general system is called a monoalphabetic substitution, with the key being
the 26-letter string corresponding to the full alphabet. The encryption key in this
example is QWERTYUIOPASDFGHJKLZXCVBNM.                      For the key given above, the



SEC. 9.5                        