THE OPERATING SYSTEM ZOO
Operating systems have been around now for over half a century. During this
time, quite a variety of them have been developed, not all of them widely known.
In this section we will briefly touch upon nine of them.     We will come back to
some of these different kinds of systems later in the book.
1.4.1 Mainframe Operating Systems
At the high end are the operating systems for mainframes, those room-sized
computers still found in major corporate data centers. These computers differ from
personal computers in terms of their I/O capacity.  A mainframe with 1000 disks
and millions of gigabytes of data is not unusual; a personal computer with these
specifications would be the envy of its friends. Mainframes are also making some-
thing of a comeback as high-end Web servers, servers for large-scale electronic
commerce sites, and servers for business-to-business transactions.
The operating systems for mainframes are heavily oriented toward processing
many jobs at once, most of which need prodigious amounts of I/O.    They typically
offer three kinds of services: batch, transaction processing, and timesharing.         A
batch system is one that processes routine jobs without any interactive user present.
Claims processing in an insurance company or sales reporting for a chain of stores
is typically done in batch mode. Transaction-processing systems handle large num-
bers of small requests, for example, check processing at a bank or airline reserva-
tions. Each unit of work is small, but the system must handle hundreds or thou-
sands per second. Timesharing systems allow multiple remote users to run jobs on
the computer at once, such as querying a big database. These functions are closely
related; mainframe operating systems often perform all of them.     An example
mainframe operating system is OS/390, a descendant of OS/360.       However, main-
frame operating systems are gradually being replaced by UNIX variants such as
Linux.
1.4.2 Server Operating Systems
One level down are the server operating systems. They run on servers, which
are either very large personal computers, workstations, or even mainframes. They
serve multiple users at once over a network and allow the users to share hardware
and software resources. Servers can provide print service, file service, or Web



36                                   INTRODUCTION                               CHAP. 1
service.  Internet providers run many server machines to support their customers
and Websites use servers to store the Web pages and handle the incoming requests.
Typical server operating systems are Solaris, FreeBSD, Linux and Windows Server
201x.
1.4.3 Multiprocessor Operating Systems
    An increasingly common way to get major-league computing power is to con-
nect multiple CPUs into a single system. Depending on precisely how they are
connected and what is shared, these systems are called parallel computers, multi-
computers, or multiprocessors. They need special operating systems, but often
these are variations on the server operating systems, with special features for com-
munication, connectivity, and consistency.
    With    the  recent  advent  of    multicore    chips  for  personal  computers,  even
conventional desktop and notebook operating systems are starting to deal with at
least small-scale multiprocessors and the number of cores is likely to grow over
time. Luckily, quite a bit is known about multiprocessor operating systems from
years of previous research, so using this knowledge in multicore systems should
not be hard. The hard part will be having applications make use of all this comput-
ing power.   Many popular operating systems, including Windows and Linux, run
on multiprocessors.
1.4.4 Personal Computer Operating Systems
    The next category is the personal computer operating system. Modern ones all
support multiprogramming, often with dozens of programs started up at boot time.
Their job is to provide good support to a single user.              They are widely used for
word processing, spreadsheets, games, and Internet access. Common examples are
Linux, FreeBSD, Windows 7, Windows 8, and Apple's OS X.                   Personal computer
operating systems are so widely known that probably little introduction is needed.
In fact, many people are not even aware that other kinds exist.
1.4.5 Handheld Computer Operating Systems
    Continuing   on   down   to  smaller  and     smaller  systems,  we   come  to  tablets,
smartphones      and  other  handheld  computers.   A      handheld  computer,  originally
known as a PDA (Personal Digital Assistant), is a small computer that can be
held in your hand during operation. Smartphones and tablets are the best-known
examples.   As   we   have   already   seen,  this  market      is  currently  dominated  by
Google's Android and Apple's iOS, but they have many competitors. Most of these
devices boast multicore CPUs, GPS, cameras and other sensors, copious amounts
of memory, and sophisticated operating systems. Moreover, all of them have more
third-party applications (``apps'') than you can shake a (USB) stick at.



SEC. 1.4                  