PROCESSES IN LINUX
In the previous sections, we started out by looking at Linux as viewed from the
keyboard, that is, what the user sees in an xterm window.        We gave examples of
shell commands and utility programs that are frequently used.         We ended with a
brief overview of the system structure. Now it is time to dig deeply into the kernel
and look more closely at the basic concepts Linux supports, namely, processes,
memory, the file system, and input/output. These notions are important because the
system calls--the interface to the operating system itself--manipulate them. For
example, system calls exist to create processes and threads, allocate memory, open
files, and do I/O.
Unfortunately, with so many versions of Linux in existence, there are some dif-
ferences between them.  In this chapter, we will emphasize the features common to
all of them rather than focus on any one specific version. Thus in certain sections
(especially    implementation  sections),  the  discussion  may  not  apply  equally   to
every version.
10.3.1 Fundamental Concepts
The main active entities in a Linux system are the processes. Linux processes
are very similar to the classical sequential processes that we studied in Chap 2.
Each process runs a single program and initially has a single thread of control.       In
other words, it has one program counter, which keeps track of the next instruction
to be executed. Linux allows a process to create additional threads once it starts.



734              CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID             CHAP. 10
     Linux is a multiprogramming system, so multiple, independent processes may
be running at the same time. Furthermore, each user may have several active proc-
esses at once, so on a large system, there may be hundreds or even thousands of
processes running. In fact, on most single-user workstations, even when the user is
absent, dozens of background processes, called daemons, are running. These are
started by a shell script when the system is booted.            (``Daemon'' is a variant
spelling of ``demon,'' which is a self-employed evil spirit.)
     A typical daemon is the cron daemon.          It wakes up once a minute to check if
there is any work for it to do.       If so, it does the work.  Then it goes back to sleep
until it is time for the next check.
     This daemon is needed because it is possible in Linux to schedule activities
minutes, hours, days, or even months in the future. For example, suppose a user
has a dentist appointment at 3 o'clock next Tuesday.            He can make an entry in the
cron daemon's database telling the daemon to beep at him at, say, 2:30. When the
appointed day and time arrives, the cron daemon sees that it has work to do, and
starts up the beeping program as a new process.
     The cron daemon is also used to start up periodic activities, such as making
daily disk backups at 4 A.M., or reminding forgetful users every year on October 31
to stock up on trick-or-treat goodies for Halloween. Other daemons handle incom-
ing and outgoing electronic mail, manage the line printer queue, check if there are
enough free pages in memory, and so forth. Daemons are straightforward to imple-
ment in Linux because each one is a separate process, independent of all other
processes.
     Processes are created in Linux in an especially simple manner. The fork system
call creates an exact copy of the original process. The forking process is called the
parent process.  The new process is called the child process.       The parent and
child each have their own, private memory images.               If the parent subsequently
changes any of its variables, the changes are not visible to the child, and vice versa.
     Open files are shared between parent and child. That is, if a certain file was
open in the parent before the fork, it will continue to be open in both the parent and
the child afterward. Changes made to the file by either one will be visible to the
other.  This behavior is only reasonable, because these changes are also visible to
any unrelated process that opens the file.
     The fact that the memory images, variables, registers, and everything else are
identical in the parent and child leads to a small difficulty: How do the processes
know which one should run the parent code and which one should run the child
code?   The secret is that the fork system call returns a 0 to the child and a nonzero
value, the child's PID (Process Identifier), to the parent. Both processes normally
check the return value and act accordingly, as shown in Fig. 10-4.
     Processes are named by their PIDs.     When a process is created, the parent is
given the child's PID, as mentioned above. If the child wants to know its own PID,
there is a system call, getpid, that provides it.  PIDs are used in a variety of ways.
For example, when a child terminates, the parent is given the PID of the child that



SEC. 10.3                         