WINDOWS POWER MANAGEMENT
     The power manager rides herd on power usage throughout the system.        His-
torically management of power consumption consisted of shutting off the monitor
display and stopping the disk drives from spinning. But the issue is rapidly becom-
ing more complicated due to requirements for extending how long notebooks can
run on batteries, and energy-conservation concerns related to desktop computers
being left on all the time and the high cost of supplying power to the huge server
farms that exist today.
     Newer power-management facilities include reducing the power consumption
of components when the system is not in use by switching individual devices to
standby states, or even powering them off completely using soft power switches.
Multiprocessors shut down individual CPUs when they are not needed, and even
the clock rates of the running CPUs can be adjusted downward to reduce power
consumption.  When a processor is idle, its power consumption is also reduced
since it needs to do nothing except wait for an interrupt to occur.
     Windows supports a special shut down mode called hibernation, which copies
all of physical memory to disk and then reduces power consumption to a small
trickle (notebooks can run weeks in a hibernated state) with little battery drain.
Because all the memory state is written to disk, you can even replace the battery on
a notebook while it is hibernated. When the system resumes after hibernation it re-
stores the saved memory state (and reinitializes the I/O devices).    This brings the
computer back into the same state it was before hibernation, without having to
login again and start up all the applications and services that were running.  Win-
dows optimizes this process by ignoring unmodified pages backed by disk already
and compressing other memory pages to reduce the amount of I/O bandwidth re-
quired.  The hibernation algorithm automatically tunes itself to balance between
I/O and processor throughput.  If there is more processor available, it uses expen-
sive but more effective compression to reduce the I/O bandwidth needed.        When
I/O bandwidth is sufficient, hibernation will skip the compression altogether. With



SEC. 11.9              