Latest:

	ADA:

	Apply Horner's rule on the following polynomial
	~Which is better? DFS or BFS
	Trace the following algorithm and find the time complexity of the operation it performs
	~Find the time complexity of mergesort
	~Traffic lights are crucial for transport safety. Assuming you have access to number of waiting cars at a given intersection, design an algorithm to ensure that a given car waits no longer than n seconds
	~Give an example of the worst case for mergesort
	What is significance of the value returned by this function?
	~In the future, we may not worry about space because it is practically limitless. Computation complexity will be the bottleneck. Explain the implications of this statement in the context of search algorithms
	~In the future, we may not worry about space because it is practically limitless. Computation complexity will be the bottleneck. How would you re design sorting algorithms?

	OS:

	Describe how a semaphore is used for the train problem
	Compare the advantages of segmentation and virtual memory
	~What operations can be performed on a semaphore?
	~What is multiprogramming?
	Is it good to ignore deadlocks?
	What is the advantage of virtual memory?
	Define process
	Write short notes on the following: a. SSTF b. FCFS c. SCAN d. C-SCAN

Old:

	Trace the following algorithm and find its time complexity
	Procedural Analyse

	What is the purpose of the sentinel in quicksort?
	Procedural Remember

	Apply horner's rule on the following polynomial
	Procedural Apply

	Give an example of the worst case for mergesort
	Conceptual Remember
		/ Procedural analyse?

	Give an example of the worst case for backtracking algorithm
	Procedural Analyse

	Assuming that you have unlimited space on your machine, create an O(1) time complexity solution for search
	Procedural Create

	Traffic lights are crucial for transport safety. Assuming you have access to number of waiting cars at a given intersection, design an algorithm to ensure that a given car waits no longer than n seconds
	Procedural Create

	Write a short note on the master method?
	Procedural Understand

	Which is better? DFS or BFS
	Conceptual Evaluate

	What is the issue with brute force string matching algorithm?
	Procedural Analyse

	Name few sorting algorithms
	Factual remember

	Compare the order of complexity: bubble sort, merge sort, shell sort
	Factual remember

	What is significance of the value returned by this function?
	Procedural evaluate

	In the future, we may not worry about space because it is practically limitless. Computation complexity will be the bottleneck. How would you re design sorting algorithms?
	Procedural Create

	In the future, we may not worry about space because it is practically limitless. Computation complexity will be the bottleneck. Explain the implications of this statement in the context of search algorithms
	Procedural Evaluate




	What is multiprogramming?
	What is a semaphore?
	What is a process?
	Is it good to ignore deadlocks?
	Describe how a semaphore is used to solve the train problem
	What is the advantage of virtual memory?
