Deadlock Prevention
The four conditions described in Table 8.2 must hold simultaneously for a resource
deadlock to arise in a system. To prevent deadlocks, the kernel must use a resource
allocation policy that ensures that one of these conditions cannot arise. In this
section, we first discuss different approaches to deadlock prevention and then
present some resource allocation policies that employ these approaches.
Nonshareable Resources   Wait-for relations will not exist in the system if all
resources could be made shareable. This way paths in an RRAG would con-
tain  only   allocation  edges,  so  circular  waits  could  not  arise.  Figure                8.6(a)
illustrates the effect of employing this approach: the request edge (Pi, Rl ) would
be replaced by an allocation edge (Rl , Pi) because the resource unit of class Rl is
shareable.



292  Part 2  Process  Management
                                  Approach                           Illustration
                                                      Without  this  approach       In  this approach
                      Make resources shareable                 Rl                       Rl
                          No waits
                      Process Pi does not get
                      blocked on resource Rl.
                                                      Pi             Pj             Pi      Pj
                      Make resources preemptible      Rk             Rl             Rk      Rl
                          No circular paths
                      Resource Rl is preempted
                      and allocated to Pi.                     Pi                       Pi
                                                      Rk             Rl             Rk      Rl
                      Prevent Hold-and-wait                                    (1)
                          No paths in RRAG
                         with > 1 process
                      Process Pi is either (1)                 Pi                       Pi
                      not permitted to block on
                      resource Rl, or (2) not                                       Rk      Rl
                      allowed to hold Rk while
                      requesting Rl.                                           (2)
                                                                                        Pi
                      Prevent circular waits                   Pj                       Pj
                      Process Pj is not permitted to  Rk             Rl             Rk      Rl
                      request resource Rl.
                                                               Pi                       Pi
             Figure 8.6  Approaches to deadlock prevention.
                      However, some resources such as printers are inherently nonshareable, so
             how can they be made shareable? OSs use some innovative techniques to solve
             this problem. An example is found in the THE multiprogramming system of
             the 1960s. It contained only one printer, so it buffered the output produced by
             different processes, formatted it to produce "page images," and used the printer
             to print one page image at a time. This arrangement mixed up the printed pages
             produced by different processes, and so the output of different processes had
             to be separated manually. (Interestingly, the reason the THE system performed
             page formatting was not to prevent deadlocks, but to improve printer utilization.
             In fact, the THE system made no provisions for handling resource deadlocks.)
             The nonshareability of a device can also be circumvented by creating virtual
             devices (see Section 1.3.2); e.g., virtual printers can be created and allocated
             to processes. However, this approach cannot work for software resources like



                                                                               Chapter 8    Deadlocks  293
shared files, which should be modified in a mutually exclusive manner to avoid
race conditions.
Preemption of Resources    If resources are made preemptible, the kernel can
ensure that some processes have all the resources they need, which would pre-
vent circular paths in RRAG. For example, in Figure 8.6(b), resource Rl can be
preempted from its current holder and allocated to process Pi. However, nonpre-
emptibility of resources can be circumvented only selectively. The page formatting
approach of the THE system can be used to make printers preemptible, but, in
general, sequential I/O devices cannot be preempted.
Hold-and-Wait      To prevent the hold-and-wait condition, either a process that
holds resources should not be permitted to make resource requests, or a process
that gets blocked on a resource request should not be permitted to hold any
resources. Thus, in Figure 8.6(c), either edge (Pi, Rl ) would not arise, or edge
(Rk, Pl ) would not exist if (Pi, Rl ) arises. In either case, RRAG paths involving
more than one process could not arise, and so circular paths could not exist.
A simple policy for implementing this approach is to allow a process to make
only one resource request in its lifetime in which it asks for all the resources it
needs. We discuss this policy in Section 8.5.1.
Circular Wait      A circular wait can result from the hold-and-wait condition, which
is a consequence of the non-shareability and non-preemptibility conditions, so it
does not arise if either of these conditions does not arise. Circular waits can be
separately prevented by not allowing some processes to wait for some resources;
e.g., process Pj in Figure 8.6(d) may not be allowed to wait for resource Rl .
It can be achieved by applying a validity constraint to each resource request.
The validity constraint is a boolean function of the allocation state. It takes
the value false if the request may lead to a circular wait in the system, so such
a request is rejected right away. If the validity constraint has the value true, the
resource is allocated if it is available; otherwise, the process is blocked for the
resource. In Section 8.5.2 we discuss a deadlock prevention policy taking this
approach.
8.5.1 All Resources Together
This is the simplest of all deadlock prevention policies. A process must ask
for all resources it needs in a single request; the kernel allocates all of them
together.  This    way  a  blocked  process  does  not  hold  any  resources,  so      the
hold-and-wait condition is never satisfied. Consequently, circular waits and dead-
locks cannot arise. Under this policy, both processes of Example 8.1 must
request a tape drive and a printer together. Now a process will either hold
both resources or hold none of them, and the hold-and-wait condition will
not be satisfied.



294  Part 2  Process Management
                     Simplicity of implementation makes "all resources together" an attractive
                  policy for small operating systems. However, it has one practical drawback--it
                  adversely influences resource efficiency. For example, if a process Pi requires a
                  tape drive at the start of its execution and a printer only toward the end of its
                  execution, it will be forced to request both a tape drive and a printer at the start.
                  The printer will remain idle until the latter part of Pi's execution and any process
                  requiring a printer will be delayed until Pi completes its execution. This situation
                  also reduces the effective degree of multiprogramming and, therefore, reduces
                  CPU efficiency.
                  8.5.2 Resource Ranking
                  Under this deadlock prevention policy, a unique number called a resource rank
                  is associated with each resource class. When a process Pi makes a request for a
                  resource, the kernel applies a validity constraint to decide whether the request
                  should be considered. The validity constraint takes the value true only if the
                  rank of the requested resource is larger than the rank of the highest ranked
                  resource currently allocated to Pi. In this case, the resource is allocated to Pi if
                  it is available; otherwise, Pi is blocked for the resource. If the validity constraint
                  is false, the request is rejected and process Pi, which made the request, would be
                  aborted.
                     Absence of circular wait-for relationships in a system using resource ranking
                  can be explained as follows: Let rankk denote the rank assigned to resource class
                  Rk, and let process Pi hold some units of resource class Rk. Pi can get blocked on a
                  request for a unit of some resource class Rl only if rankk < rankl . Now consider
                  a process Pj that holds some units of resource class Rl . Process Pj cannot request
                  a unit of resource class Rk since rankk > rankl . Thus, if Pi can wait for Pj , Pj
                  cannot wait for Pi! Hence two processes cannot get into a circular wait condition.
                  An analogous argument holds for the absence of a circular wait involving a larger
                  number of processes.
                     Example 8.9 illustrates operation of the resource ranking policy.
·
     Example 8.9  Resource Ranking
                  In Example 8.1, let rankprinter > ranktape. Request 1 leads to allocation of
                  the tape drive to Pi and request 2 leads to allocation of the printer to Pj.
                  Request 3, which is Pi's request for the printer, satisfies the validity constraint
                  because rankprinter > ranktape, but it remains pending because the printer is
                  not available. Request 4 will be rejected since it violates the validity constraint
                  and process Pj will be aborted. This action will release the printer, which will
                  then be allocated to Pi.
                  ·
                     The resource ranking policy works best when all processes require their
                  resources in the order of increasing resource rank. However, difficulties arise
