Memory Allocation to a Process
             11.4.1 Stacks and Heaps
             The compiler of a programming language generates code for a program and allo-
             cates its static data. It creates an object module for the program (see Section 11.3).
             The linker links the program with library functions and the run-time support of
             the programming language, prepares a ready-to-execute form of the program,
             and stores it in a file. The program size information is recorded in the directory
             entry of the file.
             The run-time support allocates two kinds of data during execution of the
             program. The first kind of data includes variables whose scope is associated with
             functions, procedures, or blocks, in a program and parameters of function or
             procedure calls. This data is allocated when a function, procedure or block is
             entered and is deallocated when it is exited. Because of the last-in, first-out nature
             of the allocation/deallocation, the data is allocated on the stack. The second kind
             of data is dynamically created by a program through language features like the
             new statement of Pascal, C++, or Java, or the malloc, calloc statements of
             C. We refer to such data as program-controlled dynamic data (PCD data). The
             PCD data is allocated by using a data structure called a heap.
             Stack  In a stack, allocations and deallocations are performed in a last-in, first-
             out (LIFO) manner in response to push and pop operations, respectively. We
             assume each entry in the stack to be of some standard size, say, l bytes. Only the
             last entry of the stack is accessible at any time. A contiguous area of memory is
             reserved for the stack. A pointer called the stack base (SB) points to the first entry
             of the stack, while a pointer called the top of stack (TOS) points to the last entry
             allocated in the stack. We will use the convention that a stack grows toward the
             lower end of memory; we depict it as upward growth in the figures.
             During execution of a program, a stack is used to support function calls. The
             group of stack entries that pertain to one function call is called a stack frame;
             it is also called an activation record in compiler terminology. A stack frame is
             pushed on the stack when a function is called. To start with, the stack frame
             contains either addresses or values of the function's parameters, and the return
             address, i.e., the address of the instruction to which control should be returned
             after completing the function's execution. During execution of the function, the
             run-time support of the programming language in which the program is coded
             creates local data of the function within the stack frame. At the end of the func-
             tion's execution, the entire stack frame is popped off the stack and the return
             address contained in it is used to pass control back to the calling program.
             Two provisions are made to facilitate use of stack frames: The first entry in
             a stack frame is a pointer to the previous stack frame on the stack. This entry
             facilitates popping off of a stack frame. A pointer called the frame base (FB) is



                                                                            Chapter 11  Memory  Management        377
                                                   Top of
                                                   stack       Local data       Stack
                                                   (TOS)       of calc          frame
                                                               sum              for
                                                               b                call on
                                                               a                calc
                                                   Frame       ret_ad (sample)
        Top of                                     base        Previous FB
        stack       Local data                     (FB)        Local data
        (TOS)       of sample       Stack                      of sample        Stack
                    i               frame                      i                frame
                    y               for                        y                for
                    x               call on                    x                call on
        Frame       ret_ad (main)   sample                     ret_ad (main)    sample
        base        Previous FB                                Previous FB
        (FB)
        (a)                                        (b)
Figure  11.7 Stack  after (a) main  calls sample;  (b) sample  calls calc.
used to point to the start of the topmost stack frame in the stack. It helps in
accessing various stack entries in the stack frame. Example 11.4 illustrates how
the stack is used to implement function calls.
                                                                                                                  ·
Use of a Stack                                                                                  Example     11.4
Figure 11.7 shows the stack during execution of a program containing nested
function calls. Figure 11.7(a) shows the stack after main, the primary function
of the program, has made a function call sample(x,y,i). A stack frame
was pushed on the stack when the call was made. The first entry in the stack
frame contains the previous value of the frame base, i.e., a pointer to the
previous stack frame in the stack. The second entry is ret_ad(main), which
is the return address into function main. The next three entries pertain to
the parameters x, y, and i, while the entries following them pertain to the
local data of function sample. The frame base (FB) points to the first entry
in this stack frame. The TOS pointer points to the last local data in the stack
frame. The code for function sample accesses the return address, information
about the parameters, and its local data using displacements from the frame
base (FB): Assuming each stack entry to be 4 bytes, the return address is at a
displacement of 4 from the address in the frame base, the first parameter is at
a displacement of 8, etc.
        Figure 11.7(b) shows the stack after function sample has made a function
call calc(a, b, sum). A new stack frame has been pushed on the stack, the
value of the FB has been saved in the first entry of this stack frame, the FB has
been set to point at the start of the new stack frame, and the top of stack pointer
now points at the last entry in the new stack frame. At the completion of the
function, the TOS pointer would be set to point at the stack entry preceding the
entry pointed to by FB, and FB would be loaded with the address contained



378  Part 3  Memory Management
                   in the stack entry to which it was pointing. These actions would effectively
                   pop off the stack frame of calc and set FB to point at the start of the stack
                   frame for sample. The resulting stack would be identical to the stack before
                   function sample called calc.
                   ·
                   Heap  A heap permits allocation and deallocation of memory in a random order.
                   An allocation request by a process returns with a pointer to the allocated memory
                   area in the heap, and the process accesses the allocated memory area through this
                   pointer. A deallocation request must present a pointer to the memory area to be
                   deallocated. The next example illustrates use of a heap to manage the PCD data
                   of a process. As illustrated there, "holes" develop in the memory allocation as
                   data structures are created and freed. The heap allocator has to reuse such free
                   memory areas while meeting future demands for memory.
·
     Example 11.5  Use of a Heap
                   Figure 11.8 shows the status of a heap after executing the following C program:
                         float   *floatptr1,      *floatptr2;
                         int    *intptr;
                         floatptr1  =     (float  *)  calloc (5,     sizeof (float));
                         floatptr2  =     (float  *)  calloc (4,     sizeof (float));
                         intptr  =  (int      *)  calloc (10,  sizeof (int));
                         free (floatptr2);
                   The calloc routine is used to make a request for memory. The first call
                   requests sufficient memory to accommodate 5 floating point numbers. The
                   heap allocator allocates a memory area and returns a pointer to it. This pointer
                   is stored in floatptr1. The first few bytes of each allocated memory area
                   are assumed to contain a length field. This field is used during deallocation
                   when the routine free is called with a pointer to an allocated memory area.
                   Figure 11.8(a) shows the heap after all calloc calls have been processed.
                   Figure 11.8(b) shows the heap after the free call. free has freed the mem-
                   ory area pointed to by floatptr2. This action has created a "hole" in the
                   allocation.
                   ·
                   11.4.2 The Memory Allocation Model
                   The kernel creates a new process when a user issues a command to execute a
                   program. At this time, it has to decide how much memory it should allocate to
                   the following components:
                      ·  Code and static data of the program
                      ·  Stack
                      ·  Program-controlled dynamic data (PCD data)



                                                                                  Chapter 11  Memory Management  379
        floatptr1                 20               floatptr1                   20
        floatptr2                                  floatptr2        ­  Free
        intptr                    16               intptr              area
                                  40                                           40
                Length
                   field  Free                                         Free
                          area                                         area
        (a)                                        (b)
Figure  11.8   (a) A heap; (b) A  "hole"  in  the  allocation when  memory is  deallocated.
                          Low end of
                          allocated memory         Code
                                                   Static data
                                                   PCD Data            Direction
                                                                       of growth
                                            Free
                                            area
                                                   Stack               Direction
                          High end of                                  of growth
                          allocated memory
Figure  11.9   Memory allocation model for         a process.
The size of the program can be obtained from its directory entry. Sizes of
the stack and the PCD data vary during execution of a program, so the kernel
does not know how much memory to allocate to these components. It can guess
the maximum sizes the stack and the heap would grow to, and allocate them
accordingly. However, this amounts to static allocation, which lacks flexibility.
As discussed in Section 11.2, the allocated memory may be wasted or a process
may run out of memory during its operation.
To avoid facing these problems individually for these two components, oper-
ating systems use the memory allocation model shown in Figure 11.9. The code
and static data components in the program are allocated memory areas that
exactly match their sizes. The PCD data and the stack share a single large area of
memory but grow in opposite directions when memory is allocated to new data.
The PCD data is allocated by starting at the low end of this area while the stack
is allocated by starting at the high end of the area. The memory between these
two components is free. It can be used to create new data in either component.
In this model the stack and PCD data components do not have individual size
restrictions.
A program creates or destroys PCD data by calling appropriate routines of
the run-time library of the programming language in which it is coded. The library
routines perform allocations/deallocations in the PCD data area allocated to the
process. Thus, the kernel is not involved in this kind of memory management. In
fact it is oblivious to it.
