Files and File Operations
File Types    A file system houses and organizes different types of files, e.g.,
data files, executable programs, object modules, textual information, documents,
spreadsheets, photos, and video clips. Each of these file types has its own format
for recording the data. These file types can be grouped into two classes:
路 Structured files
路 Byte stream files
A structured file is a collection of records, where a record is a meaningful unit
for processing of data. A record is a collection of fields, and a field contains a single
data item. Each record in a file is assumed to contain a key field. The value in the
key field of a record is unique in a file; i.e., no two records contain an identical key.
Many file types mentioned earlier are structured files. File types used by standard
system software like compilers and linkers have a structure determined by the OS
designer, while file types of user files depend on the applications or programs that
create them.
A byte stream file is "flat." There are no records and fields in it; it is looked
upon as a sequence of bytes by the processes that use it. The next example
illustrates structured and byte stream files.
                                                                                                                  路
Structured and Byte Stream Files                                                              Example       13.1
Figure 13.3(a) shows a structured file named employee_info. Each record
in the file contains information about one employee. A record contains four
fields: employee id, name, designation, and age. The field containing the
employee id is the key field. Figure 13.3(b) shows a byte stream file report.
                                                                                           路
File Attributes   A file attribute is a characteristic of a file that is important either
to its users or to the file system, or both. Commonly used attributes of a file are:
type, organization, size, location on disk, access control information, which indi-
cates the manner in which different users can access the file; owner name, time of
creation, and time of last use. The file system stores the attributes of a file in its
directory entry. During a file processing activity, the file system uses the attributes
of a file to locate it, and to ensure that each operation being performed on it is con-
sistent with its attributes. At the end of the file processing activity, the file system
stores changed values of the file's attributes, if any, in the file's directory entry.
