File Protection
A user would like to share a file with collaborators, but not with others. We call
this requirement controlled sharing of files. To implement it, the owner of a file
specifies which users can access the file in what manner. The file system stores this
information in the protection info field of the file's directory entry (see Figure 13.6),
and uses it to control access to the file.
Different methods of structuring the protection information of files are dis-
cussed in Chapter 15. In this section, we assume that a file's protection information
is stored in the form of an access control list. Each element of the access control list
is an access control pair of the form (<user_name>, <list_of_access_privileges>).
When a process executed by some user X tries to perform an operation <opn>
on file alpha, the file system searches for the pair with <user_name>= X, in the
access control list of alpha and checks whether <opn> is consistent with the
<list_of_access_privileges>. If it is not, the attempt to access alpha fails. For
example, a write attempt by X will fail if the entry for user X in the access control
list is (X, read), or if the list does not contain an entry for X.
The size of a file's access control list depends on the number of users and the
number of access privileges defined in the system. To reduce the size of protection
information, users can be classified in some convenient manner and an access
control pair can be specified for each user class rather than for each individual
user. Now an access control list has only as many pairs as the number of user
classes. For example, Unix specifies access privileges for three classes of users--
the file owner, users in the same group as the owner, and all other users of the
system.
In most file systems, access privileges are of three kinds--read, write, and
execute. A write privilege permits existing data in the file to be modified and
also permits new data to be added: One can further differentiate between these
two privileges by defining a new access privilege called append; however, it would
increase the size of the protection information. The execute privilege permits a
user to execute the program contained in a file. Access privileges have differ-
ent meanings for directory files. The read privilege for a directory file implies
that one can obtain a listing of the directory, while the write privilege for a
directory implies that one can create new files in the directory. The execute
privilege for a directory permits an access to be made through it--that is, it
permits a file existing in the directory to be accessed. A user can use the exe-
cute privilege of directories to make a part of his directory structure visible to
other users.
