Journaling File System
As discussed in Section 13.11.1, a file system keeps some part of file data as well as
metadata such as file control blocks, file map tables, and free lists of disk blocks
in memory during its operation. When a file system's operation is shut down
by a system administrator, the file system copies all the data and metadata held
in memory onto the disk, so that the copy on disk is complete and consistent.
However, when a power outage occurs, or when the system is switched off abruptly,
the file system does not get an opportunity to copy the file data and metadata
from memory to disk. Such a shutdown is called an unclean shutdown; it results
in loss of file data and metadata that was held in memory.
Traditionally, file systems relied on recovery techniques to protect against
loss of data and metadata because they were so simple to implement. Thus,
backups were created periodically, and files were recovered from backups when
failures were detected. Metadata was recovered by laborious searches to find and
fix inconsistencies. Use of recovery techniques imposed little overhead during
normal operation of the system. When a failure was detected, however, CPU
overhead was incurred in checking consistency of metadata, and the system was
unavailable during recovery, as well. As an example, consider what happened
when a Unix system using the ext2 file system was shut down uncleanly. On
rebooting, the file system would realize that it was shut down uncleanly, and hence
its metadata was likely to be inconsistent. It would invoke the fsck program to
recover the metadata. fsck would look through every file system data structure
on the disk and try to fix any inconsistencies it could find. Operation of the OS
was delayed while fsck executed.
A modern file system uses fault tolerance techniques so that it can resume its
operation quickly after an unclean shutdown. A journaling file system implements
fault tolerance by maintaining a journal, which resembles the intentions list used
to implement atomic actions (see Section 13.11.2). The file system records actions
that it is about to perform in the journal before actually performing them. When
operation of a file system is restored after an unclean shutdown, it consults the
journal to identify actions that were not performed as a result of the shutdown
and performs them, thus ensuring correctness of file data and metadata. The ext3
