Layers of the Input-Output Control System
The schematic of Figure 14.1 shows how the input-output control system (IOCS)
implements file operations. Processes Pi and Pj are engaged in file processing
activities and have already opened some files. When one of these processes makes
a request to read or write data from a file, the file system passes on the request to
the IOCS. Recall from Section 13.1 that the IOCS holds some file data in memory
areas called buffers, the file cache, or the disk cache to speed up file processing
activities. For a read operation, the IOCS checks whether the data required by
the process is present in memory. If so, the process can access the data straight-
away; otherwise, the IOCS issues one or more I/O operations to load the data
into a file buffer or the disk cache, and the process has to wait until this I/O
                                                                                              543



544  Part 4  File Systems
                                 Access methods
                                                                          Physical IOCS
             Process
             Pi
                                                                                 I/O
                                                                                 operations
             Process                             File buffers,                   Disk        Disk blocks
             PJ                               File cache, or                     scheduling  contain  1 records
                                                 Disk cache
             Figure 14.1         Implementation of file operations by the IOCS.
                                              Process
                                          File system layer
                                          Access method layer                    Layers of
                                                                                 the IOCS
                                          Physical IOCS layer
                                              Kernel
             Figure        14.2  Layers of the file system and the IOCS.
             operation completes. Since many processes perform I/O operations concurrently,
             the I/O operations are scheduled by a disk scheduling algorithm, which aims to
             provide high throughput of the disk. Thus the IOCS implements I/O operations
             in a manner that provides efficiency of file processing activities in processes and
             high throughput of I/O devices.
             The IOCS is structured into two layers called the access method and the
             physical IOCS. The access method layer provides efficient file processing and the
             physical IOCS layer provides high device throughput. This structure of the IOCS
             separates process-level concerns in efficient implementation of file operations
             from device-level concerns.
             Figure 14.2 shows the hierarchy of file system and IOCS layers. The number of
             IOCS layers and their interfaces vary across operating systems. In older operating
             systems, the physical IOCS was typically a part of the kernel; however, modern
             operating systems put it outside the kernel to enhance extensibility and reliability
             of the OS. We will assume that the physical IOCS is invoked through system calls,
             and it invokes other functionalities of the kernel also through system calls.
