Authentication and Password Security
Authentication is typically performed through passwords, using the scheme
shown in Figure 15.1. For every registered user, the system stores a pair of the
form (login id, <validating_info>) in a passwords table, where <validating_info>



624  Part 4  File Systems and I/O Management
             = Ek(password). To authenticate a user, the system encrypts his password using
             Ek  and  compares   the          result  with  his  validating  information  stored  in  the
             passwords table. The user is considered to be authentic if the two match.
                 If an intruder has access to the passwords table, he can launch one of
             the attacks described earlier in Section 15.4.1 to determine Ek. Alternatively,
             the intruder may launch an attack to crack the password of an individual user.
             In the scheme described above, if two users use identical passwords, the encrypted
             forms of their passwords would also be identical, which would facilitate an
             intruder's attempts at cracking of a password if the passwords table is visible
             to him. Hence the encryption function E takes two parameters. One parameter is
             the encryption key k, and the other parameter is a string derived from the user's
             login id. Now, identical passwords yield distinct encrypted strings.
                 Intruders may use password cracking programs to discover passwords of
             individual users. Their task is simplified by users' tendency to use passwords
             that are not difficult to guess, such as dictionary words and vehicle numbers,
             or use simple keyboard sequences. For infrequently used accounts, users often
             choose simple passwords that are easy to remember, the common refrain being
             that they do not have many important files in that account. However, a pass-
             word is the proverbial weakest link in the security chain. Any password that is
             cracked provides an intruder with opportunities for launching further security
             attacks. Consequently, a large number of security problems relate to use of poor
             passwords.
                 Operating systems use a set of techniques to defeat attacks on passwords.
             Table 15.6 summarizes these techniques. Password aging limits the exposure of
             passwords to intruders, which is expected to make passwords more secure. System-
             chosen passwords ensure use of strong passwords, which cannot be cracked by
             Table 15.6      OS  Techniques for Defeating Attacks on Passwords
             Technique           Description
             Password aging      Encourage or force users to change their passwords
                                 frequently, at least once every 6 months. It limits the exposure
                                 of a password to intruder attacks.
             System-chosen       A system administrator uses a methodology to generate and
             passwords           assign strong passwords to users. Users are not allowed to
                                 change these passwords. An intruder would have to use an
                                 exhaustive attack to break such passwords.
             Encryption of       The encrypted form of passwords is stored in a system file;
             passwords           however, the ciphertext form of passwords is visible to all
                                 users in the system. An intruder can use one of the attacks
                                 described in Section 15.4.1 to find Ek, or launch an
                                 exhaustive attack to crack an individual user's password.
             Encrypt and hide    The encrypted form of passwords is not visible to any person
             password            within or outside the system. Hence an intruder cannot use
             information         any of the attacks described in Section 15.4.1.
