Classifications of Computer Security
             A  security   policy  specifies  the  roles   of  entities--whether  individuals       or
             programs--in ensuring that resources of a computer system are used in a legiti-
             mate manner. In the terminology of Figure 15.1, a security policy would specify
             roles of system administrators and programs used by them to maintain the
             authentication and authorization databases and the roles of OS programs that
             constitute the authentication and authorization services.
                Ideally, it should be possible to prove that the security policies cannot be
             undermined. However, such proofs are difficult for the reasons mentioned in
             Section 15.3, so system developers must use other means to inspire confidence in
             the security capabilities of systems. These means typically take the form of some
             evidence that the system implements access control to ensure that resources are
             used in a legitimate manner, and an auditing capability, which keeps information
             on how a security-related event has been handled by the relevant entity.
                The U.S. Department of Defense evolved Trusted Computer System Eval-
             uation Criteria (TCSEC) to determine how well a computer system conforms
             with the security and protection requirements. These criteria classify computer
             systems into four divisions and several levels within each division (see Table 15.9).
             The classification envisages that a computer system can be partitioned into two
             parts: The trusted computing base (TCB) is that part of its hardware, software,
             Table 15.9     Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
             Division              Description and levels
             Verified protection   A system must support formal methods for verification of
             (division A)          security.
             Mandatory             A system must associate sensitivity labels with data and
             protection            programs and implement mandatory access control rules
             (division B)          through a reference monitor (RM).
                                   · B1: Labeled security protection
                                   · B2: Structured protection
                                   · B3: Security domains
             Discretionary         A system must implement need-to-know protection and
             protection            provide audit capabilities for accountability of subjects and
             (division C)          their actions.
                                   · C1: Discretionary security protection
                                   · C2: Controlled access protection
             Minimal               A system that fails the requirements for a higher division.
             protection
             (division D)



                                                         Chapter 15  Security and Protection  637
and firmware that implements security-related functionalities in the system; the
remainder of the system does not implement any security-related functions. The
classification of a computer system depends on whether its TCB meets the require-
ments of a specific division in the classification and all lower divisions. Division
D is the lowest security classification; it is awarded to systems that cannot meet
the requirements of any of the other divisions.
The TCB of a division C computing system possesses three key capabili-
ties. First, it permits a user to specify which other users can access the data
or programs owned by him; it performs authentication of users to provide this
capability. Second, it facilitates auditing of security-related events in the system
by keeping a record of events such as authentication attempts, file open/close,
actions of system administrators, etc. Third, it provides object reuse protection to
ensure that a user's data cannot be accidentally accessed by another user. It is
implemented by clearing the memory allocated to a data object before returning
it to the TCB's pool of free objects or free memory. Levels C1 and C2 of division
C correspond to the different protection granularities. A system satisfies level C2
of the classification if a user can identify each individual user who can access
the files owned by him; otherwise, the system satisfies level C1. Thus, a system
implementing coarse-grained protection would earn a level C1 classification (see
Section 15.6.1).
To earn a division B classification, a computer system must assign sensitivity
labels to all data and programs that reflect their security and protection levels,
and must use these labels to validate every access of a data or program, which is
called mandatory access control. It must also control the propagation of access
rights. The system developer must furnish a security policy model on which the
TCB is based. This model must employ a reference monitor (RM) to validate each
reference to a data or program by a user or his process. The reference monitor
should be tamper-proof and should be small so that its completeness can be
analyzed and tested.
Division B consists of three levels, which differ in the extent of mandatory
protection, resistance to penetration, support for trusted facility management,
and structuring of the TCB into protection-critical and non-protection-critical
elements. In level B1, mandatory access control must exist, and the system admin-
istrator should be able to audit the actions of select users or actions related to
select programs or data objects. In level B2, mandatory access control should be
extended to all users and all data and program objects. The system should be
resistant to penetration, and should provide support for system administrator
and operator functions. The system should also provide a trusted path between a
user and the TCB. This path is typically used when a user wishes to log in. Its use
eliminates masquerading attacks by a Trojan horse program (see Section 15.2). In
level B3, the system should be highly resistant to penetration and must support a
system administrator in collecting information on imminent security attacks and
terminating events that could be parts of such attacks.
To qualify for the division A rating, a system has to have the capabili-
ties of level B3, and its developer has to furnish a formal proof of its security
policy.
