Nodes of Distributed Systems
A distributed system can contain different types of nodes. A minicomputer node
has a single CPU that is shared to service applications of several users. A work-
station node has a single CPU but services one or more applications initiated by
a single user. A node that is a multiprocessor system is called a processor pool
node. It contains several CPUs, and the number of CPUs may exceed the number
of users whose applications are serviced in parallel.
A cluster is a group of hosts that work together in an integrated manner.
A cluster constitutes a single node of a distributed system; each individual host
is a node within the cluster. Figure 16.1 is a schematic diagram of a cluster. The
cluster is shown to have two nodes; however, more nodes may be added to provide
incremental growth. Each node is a computer system having its own memory
and I/O devices. The nodes share disk storage, such as a multihost RAID, which
offers both high transfer rate and high reliability (see Section 14.3.5), or a storage
area network, which offers incremental growth (see Section 14.3.4). Each node
is connected to two networks--a private LAN to which only the nodes in the
cluster are connected, and a public network through which it can communicate
with other nodes in the distributed system.
Cluster software controls operation of all nodes in a cluster. It can pro-
vide computation speedup by scheduling subtasks in an application on different
nodes within the cluster, and reliability by exploiting redundancy of CPUs
and resources within the cluster. Section 16.3 describes how these features are
implemented in the Windows cluster server and the Sun Cluster.
                                                           RAID
        Node  P     CU         CU                                CU  CU     P  Node
                 M                                                       M
                                           Private LAN
                                           Public network
Figure  16.1  Architecture of  a cluster.
