Reliable Interprocess Communication
In a conventional OS, processes that wish to communicate through messages
exist in the same host, and have unique ids assigned by its kernel. However, in a
distributed system, processes existing in different nodes may wish to communicate
with one another, hence the distributed OS assigns globally unique names to
processes. It also provides an arrangement through which a process with a given
name can be located in the system, so that other processes can communicate with
it. We discuss both these features in Section 16.4.1.
Once the location of a destination process is determined, a message meant
for it can be sent to it over the network. However, message delivery may fail
because of faults in communication links or nodes located in network path(s)
to the destination process, hence processes must make their own arrangement
to ensure reliable delivery of messages. This arrangement is in the form of an
interprocess communication protocol (IPC protocol), which is a set of rules and
conventions aimed at handling transient faults during message transmission. The
sender and destination processes invoke protocol routines when they execute the
send and receive statements. These routines perform necessary actions to
ensure reliable delivery of messages.
Table      16.2  summarizes  three        key  provisions  in     IPC         protocols--
acknowledgments, time-outs, and retransmissions. An acknowledgment informs
the sender process that its message has been delivered to the destination process.
A time-out is said to have occurred if the sender process does not receive an
acknowledgment in an expected interval of time. The message is now retransmit-
ted. These steps are repeated until the sender process receives an acknowledgment.
The protocol is implemented as follows: When a process sends a message, the
protocol routine invoked by it makes a system call to request an interrupt at the
end of a specific time interval. This interrupt is called a time-out interrupt. When
the message is delivered to the destination process, the protocol routine invoked
by the destination process sends an acknowledgment to the sender process to
inform it that its message has been delivered. If the time-out interrupt occurs
Table 16.2       Provisions  for Reliability in an IPC Protocol
Provision                    Description
Acknowledgment               When a process receives a message, the protocol
                             routine invoked by it sends an acknowledgment to
                             the sender of the message.
Time-out                     The protocol specifies an interval of time within
                             which it expects a sender process to receive an
                             acknowledgment. A time-out is said to have occurred if
                             the acknowledgment is not received within this interval.
Retransmission of a          If a time-out interrupt occurs before the sender receives
message                      an acknowledgment, the protocol routine invoked by
                             the sender retransmits the message.



660  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             in the sender's site before an acknowledgment is received, the protocol routine
             retransmits the message and makes a system call to request another time-out
             interrupt. These actions are repeated until the sender receives an acknowledg-
             ment. A similar arrangement may be used to ensure that a reply, if any, sent by
             the destination process reaches the sender process. We discuss IPC protocols in
             Sections 16.4.2­16.4.3.
             16.4.1 Naming of Processes
             All entities in a distributed system, whether processes or resources, are assigned
             unique names as follows: Each host in a system is assigned a systemwide unique
             name, which can be either numeric or symbolic, and each process or resource
             in  a  host  is  assigned      an  id  that  is  unique  in  the  host.  This  way,  the  pair
             (<host_name>, <process_id>) is unique for each process and can be used as
             its name. A process that wishes to send a message to another process uses a
             pair like (human_resources, Pj) as the name of the destination process, where
             human_resources is the name of a host. This name should be translated into
             a network address for sending the message.
                 To easily locate a host in the Internet, the Internet is partitioned into a set of
             domains that have unique names, each domain is partitioned into smaller domains
             that have unique names in the domain, and so on. A host has a unique name in the
             immediately containing domain, but its name may not be unique in the Internet,
             so a unique name for a host is formed by adding names of all the domains that
             contain it, separated by periods, starting with the smallest domain and ending
             with the largest domain. For example, the host name Everest.cse.iitb.ac.in refers
             to the server Everest in the Computer Science and Engineering Department of
             IIT Bombay, which is in the academic domain in India.
                 The domain name space is hierarchically organized; the top level in the hier-
             archy is occupied by an unnamed root domain. This domain contains a small
             number of top-level domains that represent either organizations of a specific kind,
             or organizations within a country. In the host name Everest.cse.iitb.ac.in, "in"
             is the top-level domain representing India and "ac" is the name of a domain
             containing academic organizations. Hence "ac.in" contains academic organiza-
             tions in India. "ac" is called a second-level domain because its name contains
             two domain names.
                 Each host connected to the Internet has a unique address known as the Inter-
             net protocol address (IP address). The domain name system (DNS) is a distributed
             Internet directory service that provides the IP address of a host with a given name.
             It has a name server in every domain, which contains a directory giving the IP
             address of each host in the domain. When a process operating in a host hi wishes
             to send a message to another process with the name (<host_name>, <process_
             id>), host hi performs name resolution to determine the IP address of <host
             name>. Host hi is called the resolver. Name resolution proceeds as follows: The
             resolver knows the address of a name server for the root domain. To resolve the
             name <host_name>, the resolver sends it to the name server of the root domain.
             This name server responds by returning the IP address of a name server for the



                                      Chapter 16                    Distributed Operating  Systems  661
top-level domain in <host_name>. The resolver now sends <host_name> to this
name server, which returns the address of a name server for the second-level
domain, and so on, until a name server returns the address of the required host.
Name resolution using name servers can be slow, so each resolver can cache
some name server data. This technique speeds up repeated name resolution the
same way a directory cache speeds up repeated references to the directory entry
of a file (see Section 13.15). An IP address can be kept in the cache for the amount
of time specified as the time to live, which is 1 hour. The name server of a domain
is replicated to enhance its availability and to avoid contention.
16.4.2 IPC Semantics
IPC semantics is the set of properties of an IPC protocol. IPC semantics depend
on the arrangement of acknowledgments and retransmissions used in an IPC
protocol. Table 16.3 summarizes three commonly used IPC semantics.
At-most-once semantics result when a protocol does not use acknowledg-
ments or retransmission. These semantics are used if a lost message does not
pose a serious threat to correctness of an application, or if the application knows
how to recover from such situations. For example, an application that receives
periodic reports from other processes knows when a message is not received as
expected, so it may itself communicate with a sender whose message is lost and ask
it to resend the message. These semantics provide high communication efficiency
because acknowledgments and retransmissions are not used.
At-least-once semantics result when a protocol uses acknowledgments and
retransmission, because a destination process may receive a message more than
Table 16.3  IPC Semantics
Semantics                Description
At-most-once semantics   A destination process either receives a message once, or
                         does not receive it. These semantics are obtained when
                         a process receiving a message does not send an
                         acknowledgment and a sender process does not
                         perform retransmission of messages.
At-least-once semantics  A destination process is guaranteed to receive a
                         message; however, it may receive several copies of the
                         message. These semantics are obtained when a process
                         receiving a message sends an acknowledgment, and a
                         sender process retransmits a message if it does not
                         receive an acknowledgment before a time-out occurs.
Exactly-once semantics   A destination process receives a message exactly once.
                         These semantics are obtained when sending of
                         acknowledgments and retransmissions are performed
                         as in at-least-once semantics; however, the IPC protocol
                         recognizes duplicate messages and discards them so
                         that the receiver process receives the message only once.



662  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             once if an acknowledgment is lost or delayed because of congestion in the net-
             work. A message received for the second or subsequent time is called a duplicate
             message. An application can use at-least-once semantics only if processing of
             duplicate messages does not pose any correctness problems such as updating of
             data many times instead of only once.
             Exactly-once semantics result when a protocol uses acknowledgments and
             retransmission, but discards duplicate messages. These semantics hide transient
             faults from both sender and receiver processes; however, the IPC protocol incurs
             high communication overhead due to handling of faults and duplicate messages.
             16.4.3 IPC Protocols
             An IPC protocol specifies what actions should be performed at the sites of sender
             and destination processes so that a message is delivered to a destination process
             and its reply is delivered to the sender process. We describe how IPC protocols
             are classified and present a couple of examples.
             Reliable and Unreliable Protocols   A reliable protocol guarantees that a message,
             or its reply, is not lost. It achieves this through at-least-once or exactly-once
             semantics for both messages and their replies. An unreliable protocol does not
             guarantee that a message or its reply would not be lost--it provides at-most-
             once semantics either for messages or for their replies. As commented in the last
             section, a reliable protocol incurs substantial overhead due to acknowledgments
             and retransmission of messages and replies, whereas an unreliable protocol does
             not incur these overheads.
             Blocking and Nonblocking Protocols     As discussed in Chapter 9, it is common to
             block a process that executes a receive system call if no messages have been sent
             to it. There are no intrinsic reasons to block a process that executes a send system
             call; however, blocking of a sender process may simplify a protocol, reduce its
             overhead, and also add some desirable features to its semantics. For example, if a
             sender process is blocked until its message is delivered to a destination process, the
             message would never have to be retransmitted after the sender is activated, so the
             message need not be buffered by the protocol after the sender is activated. Also,
             blocking of the sender helps to provide semantics similar to the conventional
             procedure call.
             A protocol is a blocking protocol if a sender process is blocked until it receives
             a reply to its message; otherwise, it is a nonblocking protocol. We assume that if
             a protocol does not block a sender process, interrupt(s) will be generated to
             notify the process of the arrival of a reply or an acknowledgment so that it can
             take appropriate actions. Blocking and nonblocking protocols are also called
             process-synchronous and asynchronous protocols, respectively.
             16.4.3.1 The Request-Reply-Acknowledgment Protocol
             The request-reply-acknowledgment (RRA) protocol is a reliable protocol for use
             by processes that exchange requests and replies. Receipt of the reply implies that
             the destination process has received the request, so a separate acknowledgment



                                                          Chapter 16     Distributed Operating Systems  663
             Request                    1
             buffer                     2    Header       Reply
                                        3                        Reply
                                        4                        buffer
                                        5
                          Sender             Destination
                          site                      site
Figure 16.3  Operation of a blocking version of the request-reply-acknowledgment (RRA)
protocol.
of the request is not needed. The sender, however, sends an an explicit acknowl-
edgment of the reply. A blocking version of the RRA protocol is presented as
Algorithm 16.1. Figure 16.3 depicts its operation.
Algorithm 16.1 A Blocking Version of the RRA Protocol
1.  When a process makes a request: The request is copied in a buffer called the
    request buffer in its site and also sent to the destination process in the form of
    a message. A system call is made to request a time-out interrupt. The sender
    process is blocked until a reply is received from the destination process.
2.  When a destination process receives a message: The destination process ana-
    lyzes the request contained in the message and prepares a reply. The reply is
    copied in a buffer called the reply buffer in the destination site and also sent
    to the sender process. A system call is made to request a time-out interrupt.
3.  When a time-out occurs in the sender process: The copy of the request stored
    in the request buffer is retransmitted.
4.  When the sender process receives a reply: The sender process sends an
    acknowledgment to the destination process. It also releases the request buffer,
    if not already done.
5.  When a time-out occurs in the destination process: The copy of the reply stored
    in the reply buffer is retransmitted.
6.  When the destination process receives an acknowledgment: The destination
    process releases the reply buffer.
    The sender process is blocked until it receives a reply, so a single request buffer
in the sender site suffices irrespective of the number of messages a process sends
out, or the number of processes it sends them to. The destination process is not
blocked on an acknowledgment, so it could handle requests from other processes
while it waits for an acknowledgment. Accordingly, the destination site needs
one reply buffer for each sender process. The number of messages can be reduced
through piggybacking, which is the technique of including the acknowledgment of
a reply in the next request to the same destination process. Since a sender process is
blocked until it receives a reply, an acknowledgment of a reply is actually implicit
in the next request it makes. Hence only the reply to the last request would require
an explicit acknowledgment message.



664  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
                 The RRA protocol has the at-least-once semantics because messages and
             replies cannot be lost; however, they might be delivered more than once. As
             mentioned in Table 16.3, duplicate requests would have to be discarded in the
             destination site to provide exactly-once semantics. It can be achieved as follows:
             A sender assigns ascending sequence numbers to its requests and includes them in
             its request messages. The sequence number of a message is copied into its reply and
             acknowledgment, and into the header field of the reply buffer in the destination
             site. The destination process also separately preserves the sequence number of the
             last request received from the sender process. If the sequence number in a request is
             not greater than the preserved sequence number, the request is a duplicate request
             so the destination process simply retransmits the reply if its copy is present in the
             reply buffer. Otherwise, either the copy of the reply in the reply buffer would have
             been discarded after receiving its acknowledgment, in which case the request is an
             outdated retransmission, or the destination process is still processing the request
             and would send its reply sometime in future. In either of these cases, the duplicate
             request is simply discarded.
             16.4.3.2 The Request-Reply Protocol
             The request-reply (RR) protocol simply performs retransmission of a request
             when a time-out occurs. A nonblocking version of the RR protocol that provides
             the exactly-once semantics is presented as Algorithm 16.4.3. Figure 16.4 depicts
             its operation.
             Algorithm 16.2 A Nonblocking Version of the RR Protocol
             1.  When a process makes a request: The request is copied in a request buffer
                 in the sender site and also sent to the destination process in the form of a
                 message. A system call is made to request a time-out interrupt. The sender
                 process proceeds with its computation.
             2.  When the destination process receives a message: If the message is not a dupli-
                 cate request, the destination process analyzes the request contained in the
                 message and prepares a reply, copies it in a reply buffer and also sends it to
                 the sender process. Otherwise, it simply locates the reply of the message in a
                 reply buffer and sends it to the sender process.
                             Request                1
                                            buffer  2    Header    Reply
                                                    3                     Reply
                                                                          buffers
                                            Sender       Destination
                                            site         site
             Figure  16.4  Operation of a nonblocking version of the request-reply (RR) protocol.
