Distributed Mutual Exclusion
             18.3.1 A Permission-Based Algorithm
             The algorithm by Ricart and Agrawala (1981) grants entry to a critical section
             in FCFS order. The algorithm is fully distributed in that all processes participate
             equally in deciding which process should enter a CS next. A process that wishes to
             enter a CS sends timestamped request messages to all other processes and waits
             until it receives a "go ahead" reply from each of them. If the system contains n
             processes, 2 ×(n - 1) messages have to be exchanged before a process can enter
             the critical section. Safety of mutual exclusion follows from the fact that at most
             one process can obtain (n - 1) replies at any time. Entry is granted in FCFS
             order, hence every process gains entry to CS in finite time. This feature satisfies
             the liveness property.
             Algorithm 18.1 Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm
             1.  When a process Pi wishes to enter a CS: Pi sends request messages of the
                 form ("request", Pi, <timestamp>) to all other processes in the system, and
                 becomes blocked.
             2.  When a process Pi receives a request message from process Pr:
                 a. If Pi is not interested in using a CS, it immediately sends a "go ahead"
                   reply to Pr.
                 b. If Pi itself wishes to enter a CS, it sends a "go ahead" reply to Pr if the
                   timestamp in the received request is smaller than the timestamp of its



                                              Chapter 18       Distributed Control Algorithms  719
     own request; otherwise, it adds the process id found in the request to the
     pending list.
     c. If Pi is in a CS, it simply adds the request message to the pending list.
3.  When a process Pi receives n - 1 "go ahead" replies: The process becomes
    active and enters a CS.
4.  When a process Pi exits a CS: The process sends a "go ahead" reply to every
    process whose request message exists in its pending list.
    Table 18.3 shows how steps of Algorithm 18.1 are implemented in the con-
trol part of a process. The first column shows steps in the basic computation
performed by a process. It consists of a loop in which the process requests entry
to a CS, performs some processing inside the CS, and exits from it. The other
columns show actions of the control part of the algorithm.
Table 18.3      Basic and Control Actions of Pi in a Fully Distributed
Mutual Exclusion Algorithm
                                   Algorithm steps executed by the control part
Actions of basic part        Steps       Details
repeat forever
{ Request CS entry }         1, 2(b), 3  i.   Send request messages
                                              ("request", Pi, <timestamp>)
                                              to all other processes and
                                              request the kernel to block the
                                              basic part.
                                         ii.  When a request message is
                                              received from another
                                              process, send a "go ahead"
                                              reply if the request has a
                                              smaller timestamp; otherwise,
                                              add the process id found in
                                              the request to the pending list.
                                         iii. Count the "go ahead" replies
                                              received. Activate the basic
                                              part of the process after
                                              receiving (n - 1) replies.
{ Critical Section }         2(c)        Enter all received requests in the
                                         pending list.
{ Perform CS exit }          4           Send a "go ahead" reply to every
                                         process whose request message
                                         exists in its pending list.
{ Rest of the cycle }        2(a)        When a request is received, send
                                         a "go ahead" reply immediately.
end



720  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
                 The number of messages required per CS entry can be reduced by requiring
             a process Pi to obtain permissions from a subset Ri of processes in the system.
             Ri is called the request set of Pi. Safety must be ensured by forming request sets
             carefully. The algorithm by Maekawa (1985) uses request sets of size                     n, and
             uses the following rules to ensure safety (see Exercise 18.3):
             1.  For all Pi     :   Pi   Ri.
             2.  For all Pi, Pj     :   Ri  Rj    = .
             18.3.2 Token-Based Algorithms for Mutual Exclusion
             A token represents the privilege to use a CS; only a process possessing the token
             can enter the CS. Safety of a token-based algorithm follows from this rule. When
             a process makes a request to enter a CS, the mutual exclusion algorithm ensures
             that the request reaches the process possessing the token and that the token is
             eventually transferred to the requesting process. This feature ensures liveness.
             Logical complexity and cost of a mutual exclusion algorithm depend on prop-
             erties of the system model. Hence token-based algorithms use abstract system
             models in which edges represent the paths used to pass control messages, and the
             graph formed by nodes and these edges has certain nice properties. We discuss
             two algorithms that use abstract ring and tree topologies.
             An  Algorithm      Employing       the     Ring      Topology  Figure  18.2  shows  the  logical
             model of a distributed computation and its abstract unidirectional ring model.
             The token is an object, i.e., a data structure, containing a request queue. In
             Figure 18.2(b), the token is currently with process P4, P4 is in a CS, and the
             request queue in the token contains P2 and P5. The algorithm works as fol-
             lows: A process that wishes to enter a CS sends a message containing its request
             and becomes blocked. The message is routed along the ring until it reaches the
             token holder. If the token holder is currently in a CS, its control part enters the
             requester's id in the request queue contained in the token. When the token holder
             finishes using the CS, it removes the first process id from the request queue in the
             token and sends a message containing the token and the process id. This message
             is routed along the ring until it reaches the process whose id matches the process
             id in the message. The control part of this process extracts and keeps the token
             for future use, and activates its basic part, which enters a CS. In Figure 18.2(b),
                     P2                                                     P2      P3
                                              P3
                                P1              P4                P1                      P4     P2
                                                                                                 P5
                     P6                       P5                                              token
                                                                            P6      P5
                     (a)                                          (b)
             Figure  18.2  (a)  System      model; (b)  abstract  system  model.



                                                                Chapter 18      Distributed Control Algorithms  721
process P2 would receive the token when P4 exits from its CS. The algorithm is
shown as Algorithm 18.2. The number of messages exchanged per CS entry is
order of n, where n is the number of processes.
Algorithm 18.2 Token-Based Mutual Exclusion Algorithm for a Ring Topology
1.  When a process Pi wishes to enter a CS: The process sends a request message
    ("request", Pi) along its out-edge and becomes blocked.
2.  When a process Pi receives a request message from process Pr: If Pi does not
    possess the token, it forwards the message along its out-edge. If Pi possesses
    the token and it is currently not in a CS, it forms the message ("token", Pr)
    and sends it along its out-edge. If Pi is in a CS, it merely enters Pr in the
    request queue in the token.
3.  When a process Pi completes execution of a CS: It checks whether the request
    queue is empty. If not, it removes the first process id from the queue. Let this
    id be Pr. It now forms a message ("token", Pr) and sends it along its out-edge.
4.  When a process Pi receives the message ("token", Pj): Pi checks whether
    Pi = Pj. If so, it creates a local data structure to store the token, becomes
    active and enters its  CS.  If  Pi  =   Pj, it merely forwards the message      along
    its out-edge.
Raymond's Algorithm        Raymond's algorithm uses an abstract inverted tree as
the system model. The inverted tree differs from a conventional tree in that a tree
edge points from a node to its parent in the tree. Pholder designates the process in
possession of the token. Raymond's algorithm has four key features--invariants
that ensure that a request reaches Pholder, a local queue of requesters in each
node, features to reduce the number of request messages and provisions to ensure
liveness.
    Figure 18.3 depicts the model of a distributed computation and its abstract
inverted tree model. Process P5 holds the token, so it is at the root of the tree.
Processes P1 and P3, which are its children, have out-edges pointing to P5. Simi-
larly, out-edges (P6, P1), (P2, P3), and (P4, P3) point from a process to its parent.
The algorithm maintains three invariants concerning the abstract inverted tree:
1. Process Pholder is the root of the tree.
2. Each process in the system belongs to the tree.
                   P2      P4                    Pholder            P5
              P1                        P6       P1                         P3
                   P3      P5                               P6  P2              P4
              (a)                                (b)
Figure  18.3  (a) System model; (b) abstract system model.



722  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             3. Each process Pi = Pholder has exactly one out-edge (Pi, Pj ), where Pj is its
                 parent in the tree.
             These invariants ensure that the abstract system model contains a path from every
             process Pi = Pholder to Pholder. This property is useful for ensuring that a request
             made by Pi would reach Pholder. These invariants are maintained by changing
             edges in the abstract inverted tree when a process Pk sends the token to another
             process, say process Pj--the edge (Pj, Pk) is reversed. These actions reverse the
             direction of the tree edges along which the token is sent, and establish a path
             from previous holder of the token to the new holder. For example, edge (P3, P5)
             in Figure 18.3(b) would be reversed when P5 sends the token to P3.
                 Each process maintains a local queue of requesters. A request message con-
             tains a single field requester_id. A process wishing to enter a CS puts its own id
             in its local queue and also sends a request message along its out-edge. When a
             process Pi receives a request message, it enters the requesting process's id in its
             local queue. It now forms a request message in which it puts its own id, i.e., Pi,
             and sends it along its out-edge. Thus the request reaches Pholder along a path
             ensured by invariant 3; however, the requester id is different in each edge of the
             path. To reduce the number of request messages, a process does not originate or
             send a request if a request sent earlier by it has not been honored yet. (It knows
             this because it would have received the token if its request had been honored.)
                 Pholder enters all requests it receives in its local queue. On exiting the CS,
             it removes the first process id from its local queue and sends the token to that
             process. The process receiving the token sends it to the first process in its local
             queue, unless its own id is at the head of the local queue. This action is repeated
             until the token reaches a process that is at the head of its own local queue. The
             control part of this process keeps the token with itself. Its basic part becomes
             active and enters a CS.
                 Liveness requires that every process that requests entry to a CS gets to enter it
             in finite time. To ensure this property, a process transferring the token to another
             process checks whether its local queue is empty. If the local queue still contains
             some requests, it forms a new request with its own id in the requester_id field and
             sends it to the process to which it has sent the token. This action ensures that it will
             receive the token sometime in future for servicing other requests in its local queue.
             Algorithm 18.3 Raymond's Algorithm
             1.  When a process Pi wishes to enter a CS: Process Pi enters its own id in its
                 local queue. It also sends a request message containing its own id along its
                 outgoing edge if it has not sent a request message earlier, or if its last request
                 has been already honored.
             2.  When a process Pi receives a request message from process Pr: Process Pi
                 performs the following actions:
                 a. Put Pr in its local queue.
                 b. If Pi  =  Pholder, send a request message containing its own id, i.e., Pi,
                 along its outgoing edge if it has not sent a request message earlier or if its
                 last request has been already honored.
