Resiliency
             Resiliency techniques focus on minimizing the cost of reexecution when faults
             occur. The basis for resiliency is the property that failures in a distributed system
             are partial, rather than total, so some parts of a distributed computation, or



                       Chapter 19  Recovery and Fault Tolerance                           755
the results computed by them, may survive a failure. Use of such results after
recovery would reduce reexecution, and may even avoid it. Consider a distributed
transaction that is initiated in node Ni and involves computations in nodes Nj and
Nk. It has a transaction manager in each of these nodes. The transaction would
be aborted if the transaction manager in node Nj does not respond to the prepare
message from the coordinator in node Ni because of the failure of node Nj or link
(Ni, Nj). The aborted transaction would have to be reexecuted at some other time.
Much of the reexecution would be wasteful if node Nj had already completed the
computation, but was simply unable to participate in commit processing because
of a link fault.
A nested transaction Tik is an atomic transaction that is a part of another
transaction Ti. Transactions Ti and Tik have a parent­child relationship; the
transaction controller of Ti initiates Tik and assigns it a unique id. The nested
transaction can commit or abort just like an atomic transaction, except for one
difference--when it reaches the commit point, a tentative commit is performed
for it. A tentative commit is an intermediate stage between not committed and
committed. The log of the nested transaction is written in stable storage; however,
it is not processed at this time. The actual commit of the nested transaction, which
involves processing of the log, is held in abeyance until the parent transaction com-
mits. When a parent transaction reaches its commit point, it is committed by using
a two-phase commit protocol to ensure that all its child transactions can commit.
Resiliency using nested transactions is implemented as follows: Consider a
transaction Ti that executes in node Ni and initiates a nested transaction Tik
in node Nj . Let node Nj crash and recover sometime after Tik has performed a
tentative commit. The transaction coordinator, which is in node Ni, may find that
the nested transaction Tik is taking too long to complete, or that the transaction
manager in node Nj is not responding to its prepare message, so it may decide to
initiate Tik once again--either in node Nj itself, or in another node. If it reinitiates
Tik in node Nj , the transaction manager in node Nj would check whether Tik was
initiated there in the past and had performed a tentative commit. If so, it would
not reinitiate Tik because it already has Tik's results in the log; it would simply
use Tik's results when the parent transaction Ti commits. Thus, reexecution of
Tik would be avoided.
If the transaction coordinator of Ti decided to reinitiate the nested transac-
tion in another node, it would assign another id to the new nested transaction,
say, Til . Now, transaction Tik of node Nj has become an orphan because its parent
transaction is no longer interested in it. If it has not performed a tentative commit,
it should be prevented from performing it in future. If it has performed a tentative
commit, care should be taken not to include it in the 2PC when the results of Ti
are committed so that data consistency is not harmed through duplicate actions.
To implement this aspect, the transaction coordinator for Ti maintains a list of
ids of nested transactions in which it is currently interested. When it initiates
nested transaction Tik, it would add Tik's id to the list, and when it reinitiates
the nested transaction with the id Til , it would delete Tik from this list and add
Til to it. When Tik wishes to perform a tentative commit, its transaction man-
ager would check with the transaction coordinator whether Tik's id is present
