Semantics of File Sharing
             Semantics of file sharing determine the manner in which the effect of file manip-
             ulations performed by concurrent users of a file are visible to one another. Recall
             from the discussion in Section 13.10 that all clients concurrently processing a
             single-image mutable file have the same view of its contents, so modifications
             made by one client are immediately visible to other clients processing the file.
             Clients processing a multiple-image mutable file can have different views of its
             contents. When their file processing activities complete, the file system can either
             reconcile these views in some manner to create a single image, or support exis-
             tence of many versions of the file. In the latter case, it has to ensure that any
             client that opens the file subsequently gets access to the correct version of the
             file. Table 20.2, summarizes key features of three file sharing semantics--Unix
             semantics, session semantics, and transaction semantics.
             Unix Semantics     Recall from Section 13.10 that Unix file sharing semantics sup-
             port a single-image mutable file. Thus, updates made by one client are visible to
             other clients immediately. Clients may optionally share the offset into a file. This
             feature is useful if clients process a file jointly. The Unix semantics are easy and
             efficient to implement in a conventional file system; however, as discussed later
             in Section 20.5.2, they incur the overhead of cache coherence in a DFS that uses
             file caching.
             Table 20.2      Features of File Sharing Semantics
             Semantics                      Description
             Unix semantics                 A single-image mutable file is implemented. The effect of a
                                            write operation in a file by one client is visible immediately to
                                            other clients of the file. Clients may optionally share the file
                                            offset, i.e., pointer to the next record in a file.
             Session semantics              A multiple-image mutable file is implemented. Only clients in a
                                            session share the same image of a file. Updates made by a
                                            client are visible to other clients in the same session
                                            immediately; they are visible to other clients only after the file
                                            is closed.
             Transaction                    File processing performed by a client is implemented as an
             semantics                      atomic transaction, so either all file operations are performed
                                            or none of them are performed. This property simplifies fault
                                            tolerance.
