Batch Processing Systems
            Computer systems of the 1960s were noninteractive. Punched cards were the pri-
            mary input medium, so a job and its data consisted of a deck of cards. A computer
            operator would load the cards into the card reader to set up the execution of a
            job. This action wasted precious CPU time; batch processing was introduced to
            prevent this wastage.
                      A batch is a sequence of user jobs formed for processing by the operating
            system. A computer operator formed a batch by arranging a few user jobs in a
            sequence and inserting special marker cards to indicate the start and end of the
            batch. When the operator gave a command to initiate processing of a batch, the
            batching kernel set up the processing of the first job of the batch. At the end of
            the job, it initiated execution of the next job, and so on, until the end of the batch.
            Thus the operator had to intervene only at the start and end of a batch.
                      Card readers and printers were a performance bottleneck in the 1960s,
            so batch processing systems employed the notion of virtual card readers and
            printers (described in Section 1.3.2) through magnetic tapes, to improve the
            system's throughput. A batch of jobs was first recorded on a magnetic tape, using
            a less powerful and cheap computer. The batch processing system processed these
            jobs from the tape, which was faster than processing them from cards, and wrote
            their results on another magnetic tape. These were later printed and released to
            users. Figure 3.1 shows the factors that make up the turnaround time of a job.
                      User jobs could not interfere with each other's execution directly because
            they did not coexist in a computer's memory. However, since the card reader
            was the only input device available to users, commands, user programs, and data
            were all derived from the card reader, so if a program in a job tried to read more
            data than provided in the job, it would read a few cards of the following job! To
            protect against such interference between jobs, a batch processing system required
