Case Studies
             20.6.1 Sun Network File System
             The Sun network file system (NFS) provides sharing of file systems in nodes oper-
             ating under the SunOS operating system, which is a version of Unix. Figure 20.4
             shows a schematic diagram of the NFS. It uses a two-level architecture consist-
             ing of the virtual file system (VFS) layer (see Section 13.13) and the NFS layer.
             The VFS layer implements the mount protocol and creates a systemwide unique



                                                                        Chapter 20   Distributed  File  Systems  775
                            Client
                            System calls
                            interface
                                                                             Server
                      VFS interface                                     VFS interface
                                                       NFS  layer
        Other               Unix 4.2          NFS client    NFS server       Unix 4.2
        file systems        file system                                      file system
                                              RPC/XDR       RPC/XDR
                                                          Network
Figure  20.4  Architecture of the Sun network file system (NFS).
designator for each file, called the vnode. If the file on which an operation is to
be performed is located in one of the local file systems, the VFS invokes that
file system; otherwise, it invokes the NFS layer. The NFS layer interacts with
the remote node containing the file through the NFS protocol. This architecture
permits a node to be both a client and a server at the same time.
Mount Protocol        Each node in the system contains an export list that con-
tains pairs of the form (<directory>, <list_of_nodes>). Each pair indicates that
<directory>, which exists in one of the local file systems, can be remotely mounted
only in the nodes contained in <list_of_nodes>. When the superuser of a node
makes a request to mount a remote directory, the NFS checks the validity of the
request, mounts the directory, and returns a file handle, which contains the iden-
tifier of the file system that contained the remote directory, and the inode of the
remote directory in that file system. Users in the node see a directory hierarchy
constructed through such mount commands.
NFS permits cascaded mounting of file systems, i.e., a file system could
be mounted at a mount point in another file system, which is itself mounted
inside  another       file  system,      and  so  on.  However,    the  NFS  design    carefully
avoids transitivity of the mount mechanism. For example, consider the following
situation:
1. The superuser in node N1 of the system mounts the file system C of node N3
at mount point y in the local file system B.
2. The superuser in node N2 mounts the file system B of node N1 at mount
point x in the local file system A.
The NFS does not permit users in node N2 to access the file system C that was
mounted over some part of file system B. This way, each host's view of the direc-
tory hierarchy is the result of the mounts performed by its own superuser only,
which enables the file server to operate in a stateless manner. If this restriction were



776  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             not imposed, each file server would have to know about all mounts performed by
             all clients over its file system, which would require the file server to be stateful.
             NFS Protocol     The NFS protocol uses the remote service paradigm (i.e., remote
             file processing--see Section 20.1.1) through a client­server model employing
             remote procedure calls (RPC). A file server is stateless, so each RPC has param-
             eters that identify the file, the directory containing the file, record id and the data
             to be read or written. The NFS provides calls for looking up a file within a direc-
             tory; reading directory entries; manipulating links and directories; accessing file
             attributes, i.e., inode information; and performing a file read/write operation.
             Since a file server is stateless, it performs an implicit open and close for every
             file operation, and does not use the Unix buffer cache (see Section 14.13.1.2 for
             a description of the Unix buffer cache). An NFS server does not provide locking
             of files or records; users must use their own means for concurrency control.
             Path Name Resolution           Let a user U1 located in node N1 use a path name
             x/y/z/w where y is the root directory of a mounted file system. To start with,
             host node N1 creates vnodex, the vnode for x. The NFS uses the mount table of
             N1 while looking up the next component of the path name, so it knows that y is
             a mounted directory. It creates vnodey from the information in the mount table.
             Let vnodey be for a file in node N2, so the NFS makes a copy of directory y in
             node N1. While looking for z in this copy y, the NFS again uses the mount table
             of N1. This action would resolve z properly even if z were a file system that was
             mounted by the superuser of node N1 over some point in the remote file system y.
             The file server in node N2, which contains y, does not need to have any knowledge
             of this mounting. Instead of using this procedure, if the path name y/z/w were
             to be handed over to the file server in node N2, it would have to know about all
             mounts performed by all clients over its file system. It would require the file server
             to be stateful.
             A directory names cache is used in each client node to speed up path name
             resolution. It contains remote directory names and their vnodes. New entries
             are added to the cache when a new path name prefix is resolved, and entries are
             deleted when a lookup fails because of mismatch between attributes returned by
             the file server and those of the cached vnodes.
             File Operations and File Sharing Semantics       The NFS uses two caches to speed
             up file operations. A file attributes cache caches inode information. This cache is
             used because it was found that a large percentage of requests made to a file server
             concerned file attributes. The cached attributes are discarded after 3 seconds for
             files and after 30 seconds for directories.
             The file blocks cache is the conventional file cache. It contains data blocks
             from the file. The file server uses large (8 Kbytes) data blocks, and uses read-
             ahead and delayed-write techniques (i.e. buffering techniques, see Section 14.8)
             for improving file access performance. Cache validation is performed through
             timestamps associated with each file, and with each cache block. Contents of
             a cached block are assumed to be valid for a certain period of time. For any
             access after this time, the cached block is used only if its timestamp is larger
             than the timestamp of the file. A modified block is sent to the file server for



                                            Chapter 20                Distributed     File  Systems  777
writing into the file at an unspecified time during processing of a file, or when
the file is closed. This policy is used even if clients concurrently access the same
file block in conflicting modes. As a result of this policy and the cache validation
scheme, visibility of a file modification made by one client to concurrent clients
is unpredictable and the file sharing semantics are neither Unix semantics nor
session semantics.
20.6.2 Andrew and Coda File Systems
Andrew, the distributed computing environment developed at the Carnegie
Mellon University, is targeted at gigantic distributed systems containing 5000
workstations. Each workstation has a local disk, which is used to organize the
local name space. This name space contains system programs for booting and
operation of the workstation, and temporary files which are accommodated there
for performance reasons. All clients have an identical shared name space, which
is location transparent in nature. It is implemented by dedicated servers which
are collectively called Vice.
Scalable performance is obtained as follows: Clusters localize file processing
activities as much as possible so that file accesses do not cause traffic on the
system backbone network. Traffic within a cluster is reduced by caching an entire
file on the local disk of a workstation when it is opened for processing. These two
techniques ensure that network traffic in the system does not grow as system size
grows.
Shared Name Space   Andrew uses the concept of a volume. A volume typically
contains files of a single user. Many volumes may exist on a disk. Andrew treats
a volume in much the same way Unix treats a disk partition, though a volume
can be substantially smaller than a disk partition. A volume can be mounted.
This fact provides a much finer granularity for mounting than in Unix. The file
identifier used by Vice contains volume number of the volume which contains a
file, and an index into the array of inodes contained in the volume.
A volume location database (VLDB) contains information about each vol-
ume in the system. This database is replicated on every server. Volumes are
migrated from one disk to another in order to balance the utilization of disks
in the system. The server that previously contained a migrated volume main-
tains some forwarding information until all servers update their volume location
databases. This arrangement simplifies volume migration by eliminating the need
to update all volume location databases at the same time. Actual migration of a
volume is performed with minimum disruption of file processing activities by the
following procedure: A copy of a volume is made at the new server. While this
operation is in progress, its original server continues to service requests. Once
the copying is completed, the volume is made off-line, recent updates performed
after the copy operation was initiated are made on the copy at the new server,
and the new copy is made operational.
File Operations and File Sharing Semantics  When a client opens a file, Andrew
caches the file on the local disk of the client's workstation using 64 KB chunks.



778  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             However, it adapts the chunk size on a per-client basis to suit the client's file
             access pattern. As mentioned earlier in Section 20.5.2, studies conducted in the
             mid-1990s have reported that chunks of 8 KB were widely used, and the hit ratio
             in the file cache typically exceeded 0.98. File open/close calls are directed to a user-
             level process called Venus. Venus caches a file when a client opens it, and updates
             the server's copy when the client closes the file. File read and write operations are
             performed on the cached copy without involving Venus. Consequently, changes
             made to a file are not immediately reflected on the server's copy and they are
             not visible to other clients accessing the file. These file sharing semantics have
             some features of session semantics; however, Andrew does not maintain multiple
             versions of a file.
             The file copy cached by the Venus process in a node is considered to be valid
             unless the Venus process is told otherwise. This way, a cached copy of a file may
             persist across the close operation on the file and the next open operation on it in
             the same workstation. Cache validation is performed in a server-initiated manner
             using a mechanism called callback. When some file F is cached at client node N1
             because of an open, the server notes this fact in its table. As long as this entry
             remains in the table, node N1 is said to have a callback on F. When the copy of
             F in the server is updated because some client closed F, the server removes N1's
             entry from its table and notifies the Venus process in node N1 that its callback on
             F has been broken. If some client in N1 tried to open F in the future, Venus would
             know that N1 does not have a callback on F, so it would cache file F once again.
             Venus maintains two caches--a data cache and a status cache. The status cache
             is used to service system calls that query file status information. Both caches are
             managed on an LRU basis.
             Path name resolution is performed on a component-by-component basis.
             Venus maintains a mapping cache, which contains information concerning vol-
             umes which have been accessed recently. Since volumes may be migrated, Venus
             treats this information as a hint and discards it if it turns out to be wrong. During
             path name resolution, Venus also copies each directory involved in the path name
             in its cache. Presence of these cached copies may speed up path name resolution
             in the future.
             File servers are multithreaded to prevent them from becoming a bottleneck.
             A lightweight process package is used to spawn new lightweight processes to
             handle file requests. Client­server communication is organized by using RPCs.
             Features of Coda     Coda, which is a successor of the Andrew file system version 2,
             added two complementary features to achieve high availability--replication and
             disconnected operation. Coda supports replication of volumes. The collection of
             servers that have a copy of a volume is known as the volume storage group (VSG).
             Coda controls use of replicated files through the read one, write all policy--only
             one of the copies needs to be available for reading; however, all copies must be
             updated at the same time. A multicasting RPC called multiRPC is used for this
             purpose.
             A node enters the disconnected mode of operation when the subset of
             VSG accessible to it is null. Andrew already supported whole-file caching in



                                                                            Chapter 20  Distributed  File  Systems  779
a client's node, so a client in the disconnected mode of operation could operate
on a file in isolation. The file updates made by this client would be reflected in
the file when the client's node is able to connect to the server. Any conflicts
with file versions created by other file processing activities in the meanwhile
would have to be resolved at this time. This step can be automated in an
application-specific manner; however, it may require human intervention in some
cases.
Having a single file in cache may not be adequate for disconnected opera-
tion, so Coda provides hoarding of files. A user can provide a hoarding database,
which contains path names of important files, to Coda. During a session initi-
ated by the user, Coda uses a prioritized cache management policy to hold some
recently accessed files and files named in the hoarding database in the cache of
the user's node. This set of files is refined by recomputing their priorities period-
ically. This way, the cache in the node may contain an adequate set of files when
the node becomes disconnected, which would enable meaningful disconnected
operation.
20.6.3 GPFS
The general parallel file system is a high-performance shared-disk file system
for large computing clusters operating under Linux. GPFS uses data striping
(see Section 14.3.5) across all disks available in a cluster. Thus, data of a file is
written on several disks, which can be read from or written to in parallel. A large-
size block, i.e., strip, is used to minimize seek overhead during a file read/write;
however, a large disk block may not provide high data transfer rates for small files
that would occupy only a small number of strips, so a smaller subblock, which
could   be  as  small  as  1   of  a  block,  is  used  for  small  files.
                           32
Locking is used to maintain consistency of file data when processes in several
nodes of the cluster access a common file. High parallelism in accessing a common
file requires fine-grained locking, whereas low locking overhead requires coarse-
grained locking. So GPFS uses a composite approach that works as follows:
The first process that performs a write operation on a file is given a lock whose
byte range covers the entire file. If no other process accesses the same file, this
process does not have to set and reset locks while processing the file. If another
process wishes to write into the same file, that process is given a lock with a
byte range that covers the bytes it wishes to write, and the byte range in the lock
already held by the first process is reduced to exclude those bytes. This way the
lock granularity is as coarse as possible, but as fine as necessary, subject to the
restriction that the byte range in a lock cannot be smaller than a data block on
a disk. Whenever the byte range in a lock is narrowed, updates made on the
bytes that are not covered by the new byte range in the lock are flushed to the
file. This way, a process acquiring a lock for these bytes would see their latest
values.
The locking scheme of GPFS involves a centralized lock manager and a few
distributed lock managers, and employs the notion of lock tokens to reduce the
latency and overhead of locking. The first time some process in a node accesses



780  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
             a file, the centralized lock manager issues a lock token to that node. This token
             authorizes the node to locally issue locks on the file to other processes in that
             node, until the lock token is taken away from it. This arrangement avoids repeated
             traffic between a node and the centralized lock manager for acquiring locks on
             a file. When a process in some other node wishes to access the same file, the
             centralized lock manager takes away the lock token from the first node and gives
             it to the second node. Now, this node can issue locks on that file locally. The data
             bytes covered by byte ranges in the locks issued by a node can be cached locally
             at that node; no cache coherence traffic would be generated when these bytes are
             accessed or updated because no process in another node is permitted to access
             these bytes.
             Race conditions may arise over the metadata of a file, such as the index
             blocks in the FMT, when several nodes update the metadata concurrently. For
             example, when two nodes add a pointer each to the same index block in the FMT,
             one client's update of the block would be lost when another client updates it. To
             prevent inconsistencies due to race conditions, one of the nodes is designated as
             the metanode for the file, and all accesses and updates to the file's metadata are
             made only by the metanode. Other nodes that update the file send their metadata
             to the metanode and the metanode commits them to the disk.
             The list of free disk space can become a performance bottleneck when file
             processing activities in many nodes need more disk space. The central allocation
             manager avoids it by partitioning the free space map and giving one partition of
             the map to each node. A node makes all disk space allocations, using its partition
             of the map. When the free space in that partition is exhausted, it requests the
             allocation manager for another partition.
             Each node writes a separate journal for recovery. This journal is located in
             the file system to which the file being processed belongs. When a node fails, other
             nodes can access its journal and carry out the pending updates. Consistency of
             the data bytes updated in this manner is implicit because the failed node would
             have locked the data bytes; these locks are released only after the journal of the
             failed node is processed.
             Communication failures may partition the system. However, file process-
             ing activities in individual nodes may not be affected because nodes may be
             able to access some of the disks. Such operation of the file system can lead to
             inconsistencies in the metadata. To prevent such inconsistencies, only nodes in
             one partition should continue file processing and all other nodes must cease
             file processing. GPFS achieves it as follows: Only nodes in the majority par-
             tition, i.e., the partition that contains a majority of the nodes, are allowed to
             perform file processing at any time. GPFS contains a group services layer that
             uses heartbeat messages to detect node failures; it notifies a node when the node
             has fallen out of the majority partition or has become a part of the majority
             partition once again. However, this notification may itself be delayed indef-
             initely because of communication failures, so GPFS uses features in the I/O
             subsystem to prevent those nodes that are not included in the majority partition
             from accessing any disks. GPFS uses a replication policy to protect against disk
             failures.
