Issues in Distributed System Security
We term the nodes that are directly under control of the distributed OS as secure
nodes. They contain resources and offer services to users and their processes.
As shown in Figure 21.1, a user process accesses a remote resource through a
message sent to the resource coordinator process. Such a message may travel
over public networks and pass through computer systems called communication
processors, which operate under local operating systems. Communication pro-
cessors employ a store-and-forward model to route a message to its destination.
Thus, messages between processes are exposed to observation and interference
                                                                                           785



786  Part 5  Distributed Operating Systems
                                            N1                          N2
                           Remote                                                    Resource
                           user                          ··  CP   ··                 coordinator
                           process          Pi                          Pj           process
                                            Secure node                 Secure node
             Figure  21.1  Security threats in a network.
             by external entities. This situation raises new security threats that do not arise in
             a conventional system.
                Security threats in distributed operating systems are of four kinds:
             1. Leakage: Release of message contents to unauthorized user(s).
             2. Tampering: Modification of message contents.
             3. Stealing: Use of system resources without authorization.
             4. Denial of service to authorized users: This threat can be in the form of willful
                destruction of system resources not amounting to stealing, i.e., destruction
                without any gain to the perpetrator, or disruption of access to resources.
                Leakage and tampering are termed threats to message security. Tampering
             may be employed to modify the text of a message, which is a threat to its integrity,
             or modify the identity of its sender, which is a threat to its authenticity. An intruder
             can perform stealing by masquerading through tampering. Denial of service can
             be achieved by tampering with the text of a message or ids of its source and
             destination processes, or by masquerading. These security threats are addressed
             through two means:
             ·  Message security techniques: Special techniques are employed to thwart
                attacks on messages.
             ·  Authentication of remote users: Trusted means are provided to authenticate
                remote users.
             Attacks on integrity and authenticity are addressed through a combination of
             these two means.
             21.1.1 Security Mechanisms and Policies
             Figure 21.2 shows an arrangement of security mechanisms and policies. Authen-
             tication  in  conventional     systems          has  been  described    earlier  in  Chapter  15.
             Authentication in a distributed system has two new facets: The authentication ser-
             vice must be trustworthy and available to all nodes in a system. Encryption is used
             to ensure secrecy and integrity of the authentication and authorization databases.
             It is also used to implement message security by encoding the text of messages.
             Processes need to know what encryption keys to use while communicating with
             other processes. The lower-level mechanism called key distribution generates and



                                                          Chapter 21    Distributed System  Security  787
                                         Policies
                                 Encryption
                   Authenti-                       Key
                                 cation  distribution
Figure  21.2  Mechanisms and policies for distributed system security.
Table 21.1       Classes of Security Attacks in Distributed Systems
Attack             Description
Eavesdropping      An intruder listens to interprocess messages over the
                   network to obtain information concerning message content
                   or statistical features of messages.
Message tampering  An intruder intercepts messages, alters their contents, and
                   reinserts them into the communication stream.
Message replay     An intruder makes copies of messages exchanged by
                   communicating processes and inserts the copies into the
                   communication stream at a later time as if they were genuine
                   messages being sent at that time.
Masquerading       An intruder is able to pass off as an authorized user of the
                   system while consuming resources, and while sending and
                   receiving messages.
distributes encryption keys for use by communicating processes; it is discussed in
Section 21.2.1.
21.1.2 Security Attacks in Distributed Systems
Security attacks in distributed systems, which are typically launched through
messages, can be classified into the four classes summarized in Table 21.1. Eaves-
dropping can take various forms like obtaining the content of a message or
collecting information about messages exchanged by specific nodes or passing
over specific links. In a police or military information system, the latter analyses
can be used to reveal or guess identities of communicating entities. Message tam-
pering can be used to mislead the recipient of a message. This attack is feasible
in a store-and-forward network.
Message replay can be used to achieve a variety of nefarious ends. The recip-
ient of a replayed message may be misled into thinking that messages are being
exchanged in real time. If the recipient is a user process, it might be fooled into
taking actions that are unnecessary, absurd, or wasteful in terms of resources.
It may also be misled into revealing confidential information. If the recipient is a
server process, a replayed message may lead to wrong authentication, leading to
opportunities for masquerading or stealing of resources.
