Distributed Operating Systems
A distributed computer system consists of several individual computer systems
connected through a network. Each computer system could be a PC, a mul-
tiprocessor system (see Chapter 10), or a cluster, which is itself a group of
computers that work together in an integrated manner (see Section 16.2). Thus,
many resources of a kind, e.g., many memories, CPUs and I/O devices, exist in
the distributed system. A distributed operating system exploits the multiplicity
of resources and the presence of a network to provide the benefits summarized in
Table 3.8. However, the possibility of network faults or faults in individual com-
puter systems complicates functioning of the operating system and necessitates
use of special techniques in its design. Users also need to use special techniques
to access resources over the network. We discuss these aspects in Section 3.8.1.
     Resource sharing has been the traditional motivation for distributed operat-
ing systems. A user of a PC or workstation can use resources such as printers
over a local area network (LAN), and access specialized hardware or software
resources of a geographically distant computer system over a wide area network
(WAN).
     A distributed operating system provides reliability through redundancy of
computer systems, resources, and communication paths--if a computer system
or a resource used in an application fails, the OS can switch the application to
another computer system or resource, and if a path to a resource fails, it can utilize
another path to the resource. Reliability can be used to offer high availability of
resources and services, which is defined as the fraction of time a resource or service
is operable. High availability of a data resource, e.g., a file, can be provided by
keeping copies of the file in various parts of the system.
     Computation speedup implies a reduction in the duration of an application,
i.e., in its running time. It is achieved by dispersing processes of an application
Table 3.8    Benefits  of Distributed Operating Systems
Benefit                Description
Resource sharing       Resources can be utilized across boundaries of individual
                       computer systems.
Reliability            The OS continues to function even when computer
                       systems or resources in it fail.
Computation speedup    Processes of an application can be executed in different
                       computer systems to speed up its completion.
Communication          Users can communicate among themselves irrespective of
                       their locations in the system.



72  Part 1  Overview
            to different computers in the distributed system, so that they can execute at the
            same time and finish earlier than if they were to be executed in a conventional OS.
                      Users of a distributed operating system have user ids and passwords that
            are valid throughout the system. This feature greatly facilitates communication
            between users in two ways. First, communication through user ids automatically
            invokes the security mechanisms of the OS and thus ensures authenticity of com-
            munication. Second, users can be mobile within the distributed system and still
            be able to communicate with other users through the system.
            3.8.1 Special Techniques of Distributed Operating Systems
            A distributed system is more than a mere collection of computers connected to
            a network--functioning of individual computers must be integrated to achieve
            the benefits summarized in Table 3.8. It is achieved through participation of
            all computers in the control functions of the operating system. Accordingly, we
            define a distributed system as follows:
            Definition 3.8 Distributed System        A system consisting of two or more nodes,
            where each node is a computer system with its own clock and memory, some
            networking hardware, and a capability of performing some of the control
            functions of an OS.
                      Table 3.9 summarizes three key concepts and techniques used in a distributed
            OS. Distributed control is the opposite of centralized control--it implies that the
            control functions of the distributed system are performed by several computers
            in the system in the manner of Definition 3.8, instead of being performed by
            a single computer. Distributed control is essential for ensuring that failure of a
            single computer, or a group of computers, does not halt operation of the entire
            system. Transparency of a resource or service implies that a user should be able to
            access it without having to know which node in the distributed system contains
            it. This feature enables the OS to change the position of a software resource or
            service to optimize its use by applications. For example, in a system providing
            Table 3.9     Key Concepts and Techniques Used in a Distributed OS
            Concept/Technique    Description
            Distributed control  A control function is performed through participation of
                                 several nodes, possibly all nodes, in a distributed system.
            Transparency         A resource or service can be accessed without having to
                                 know its location in the distributed system.
            Remote procedure     A process calls a procedure that is located in a different
            call (RPC)           computer system. The RPC is analogous to a procedure or
                                 function call in a programming language, except that the OS
                                 passes parameters to the remote procedure over the network
                                 and returns its results over the network.
