Sequential Search and Brute-Force String Matching
We saw in the previous section two applications of the brute-force approach to the
          sorting porblem. Here we discuss two applications of this strategy to the problem
          of searching. The first deals with the canonical problem of searching for an item
          of a given value in a given list. The second is different in that it deals with the
          string-matching problem.
          Sequential Search
          We have already encountered a brute-force algorithm for the general searching
          problem: it is called sequential search (see Section 2.1). To repeat, the algorithm
          simply compares successive elements of a given list with a given search key until
          either a match is encountered (successful search) or the list is exhausted without
          finding a match (unsuccessful search). A simple extra trick is often employed
          in implementing sequential search: if we append the search key to the end of
          the list, the search for the key will have to be successful, and therefore we can
          eliminate the end of list check altogether. Here is pseudocode of this enhanced
          version.
          ALGORITHM  SequentialSearch2(A[0..n], K)
          //Implements sequential search with a search key as a sentinel
          //Input: An array A of n elements and a search key K
          //Output: The index of the first element in A[0..n - 1] whose value is
          //        equal to K or -1 if no such element is found
          A[n]  K
          i0
          while A[i] = K do
                    ii+1
          if i < n return i
          else return -1
          Another straightforward improvement can be incorporated in sequential
          search if a given list is known to be sorted: searching in such a list can be stopped
          as soon as an element greater than or equal to the search key is encountered.
          Sequential search provides an excellent illustration of the brute-force ap-
          proach, with its characteristic strength (simplicity) and weakness (inferior effi-
          ciency). The efficiency results obtained in Section 2.1 for the standard version of
          sequential search change for the enhanced version only very slightly, so that the
          algorithm remains linear in both the worst and average cases. We discuss later in
          the book several searching algorithms with a better time efficiency.
Brute-Force String Matching
Recall the string-matching problem introduced in Section 1.3: given a string of n
characters called the text and a string of m characters (m  n) called the pattern,
find a substring of the text that matches the pattern. To put it more precisely, we
want to find i--the index of the leftmost character of the first matching substring
in the text--such that ti = p0, . . . , ti+j = pj , . . . , ti+m-1 = pm-1:
t0      ...  ti  ...       ti+j  ...  ti+m-1    ...              tn-1       text T
             p0  ...       pj    ...  pm-1      pattern P
If matches other than the first one need to be found, a string-matching algorithm
can simply continue working until the entire text is exhausted.
A brute-force algorithm for the string-matching problem is quite obvious:
align the pattern against the first m characters of the text and start matching the
corresponding pairs of characters from left to right until either all the m pairs
of the characters match (then the algorithm can stop) or a mismatching pair is
encountered. In the latter case, shift the pattern one position to the right and
resume the character comparisons, starting again with the first character of the
pattern and its counterpart in the text. Note that the last position in the text that
can still be a beginning of a matching substring is n - m (provided the text positions
are indexed from 0 to n - 1). Beyond that position, there are not enough characters
to match the entire pattern; hence, the algorithm need not make any comparisons
there.
ALGORITHM    BruteForceStringMatch(T [0..n - 1], P [0..m - 1])
//Implements brute-force string matching
//Input: An array T [0..n - 1] of n characters representing a text and
//           an array P [0..m - 1] of m characters representing a pattern
//Output: The index of the first character in the text that starts a
//           matching substring or -1 if the search is unsuccessful
for i  0 to n - m do
        j 0
        while j < m and P [j ] = T [i + j ] do
             j j +1
        if j = m return i
return -1
An operation of the algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3.3. Note that for this
example, the algorithm shifts the pattern almost always after a single character
comparison. The worst case is much worse: the algorithm may have to make
all m comparisons before shifting the pattern, and this can happen for each of
the n - m + 1 tries. (Problem 6 in this section's exercises asks you to give a
specific example of such a situation.) Thus, in the worst case, the algorithm makes
                N   O  B    O       D  Y   _    N  O      T   I  C       E    D  _  H  I  M
                N   O  T
                    N  O    T
                       N    O       T
                            N       O  T
                                    N  O   T
                                       N   O    T
                                           N    O  T
                                                N  O      T
     FIGURE 3.3     Example of brute-force string matching. The       pattern's characters   that  are
                    compared with their text counterparts are in      bold type.
     m(n - m + 1) character comparisons, which puts it in the O(nm) class. For a typical
     word search in a natural language text, however, we should expect that most shifts
     would happen after very few comparisons (check the example again). Therefore,
     the average-case efficiency should be considerably better than the worst-case
     efficiency. Indeed it is: for searching in random texts, it has been shown to be linear,
     i.e.,      (n). There are several more sophisticated and more efficient algorithms for
     string searching. The most widely known of them--by R. Boyer and J. Moore--is
     outlined in Section 7.2 along with its simplification suggested by R. Horspool.
     Exercises 3.2
     1.     Find the number of comparisons made by the sentinel version of sequential
            search
            a.  in the worst case.
            b. in the average case if the probability of a successful search is p (0  p  1).
     2.     As shown in Section 2.1, the average number of key comparisons made by
            sequential search (without a sentinel, under standard assumptions about its
            inputs) is given by the formula
                                       Cavg(n)  =  p(n +  1)  +  n(1  -  p),
                                                   2
            where p is the probability of a successful search. Determine, for a fixed n, the
            values of p (0  p  1) for which this formula yields the maximum value of
            Cavg(n) and the minimum value of Cavg(n).
     3.     Gadget testing  A firm wants to determine the highest floor of its n-story
            headquarters from which a gadget can fall without breaking. The firm has two
            identical gadgets to experiment with. If one of them gets broken, it cannot be
            repaired, and the experiment will have to be completed with the remaining
            gadget. Design an algorithm in the best efficiency class you can to solve this
            problem.
4.   Determine the number of character comparisons made by the brute-force
     algorithm in searching for the pattern GANDHI in the text
              THERE_IS_MORE_TO_LIFE_THAN_INCREASING_ITS_SPEED
     Assume that the length of the text--it is 47 characters long--is known before
     the search starts.
5.   How many comparisons (both successful and unsuccessful) will be made by
     the brute-force algorithm in searching for each of the following patterns in
     the binary text of one thousand zeros?
         a. 00001        b. 10000      c. 01010
6.   Give an example of a text of length n and a pattern of length m that constitutes
     a worst-case input for the brute-force string-matching algorithm. Exactly how
     many character comparisons will be made for such input?
7.   In solving the string-matching problem, would there be any advantage in
     comparing pattern and text characters right-to-left instead of left-to-right?
8.   Consider the problem of counting, in a given text, the number of substrings
     that start with an A and end with a B. For example, there are four such
     substrings in CABAAXBYA.
     a.  Design a brute-force  algorithm  for    this problem and determine its     effi-
         ciency class.
     b. Design a more efficient algorithm for this problem. [Gin04]
9.   Write a visualization program for the brute-force string-matching algorithm.
10.  Word Find     A popular diversion in the United States, "word find" (or "word
     search") puzzles ask the player to find each of a given set of words in a square
     table filled with single letters. A word can read horizontally (left or right),
     vertically (up or down), or along a 45 degree diagonal (in any of the four
     directions) formed by consecutively adjacent cells of the table; it may wrap
     around the table's boundaries, but it must read in the same direction with no
     zigzagging. The same cell of the table may be used in different words, but, in a
     given word, the same cell may be used no more than once. Write a computer
     program for solving this puzzle.
11.  Battleship game     Write a program based on a version of brute-force pattern
     matching for playing the game Battleship on the computer. The rules of the
     game are as follows. There are two opponents in the game (in this case,
     a human player and the computer). The game is played on two identical
     boards (10 × 10 tables of squares) on which each opponent places his or her
     ships, not seen by the opponent. Each player has five ships, each of which
     occupies a certain number of squares on the board: a destroyer (two squares),
     a submarine (three squares), a cruiser (three squares), a battleship (four
     squares), and an aircraft carrier (five squares). Each ship is placed either
     horizontally or vertically, with no two ships touching each other. The game
     is played by the opponents taking turns "shooting" at each other's ships. The
          result of every shot is displayed as either a hit or a miss. In case of a hit, the
          player gets to go again and keeps playing until missing. The goal is to sink all
          the opponent's ships before the opponent succeeds in doing it first. To sink a
          ship, all squares occupied by the ship must be hit.
     