On to the other problem--that of computing the convex hull. Finding the convex
hull for a given set of points in the plane or a higher dimensional space is one of
the most important--some people believe the most important--problems in com-
putational geometry. This prominence is due to a variety of applications in which
         this problem needs to be solved, either by itself or as a part of a larger task. Sev-
         eral such applications are based on the fact that convex hulls provide convenient
         approximations of object shapes and data sets given. For example, in computer an-
         imation, replacing objects by their convex hulls speeds up collision detection; the
         same idea is used in path planning for Mars mission rovers. Convex hulls are used
         in computing accessibility maps produced from satellite images by Geographic
         Information Systems. They are also used for detecting outliers by some statisti-
         cal techniques. An efficient algorithm for computing a diameter of a set of points,
         which is the largest distance between two of the points, needs the set's convex hull
         to find the largest distance between two of its extreme points (see below). Finally,
         convex hulls are important for solving many optimization problems, because their
         extreme points provide a limited set of solution candidates.
         We start with a definition of a convex set.
         DEFINITION  A set of points (finite or infinite) in the plane is called convex if
         for any two points p and q in the set, the entire line segment with the endpoints
         at p and q belongs to the set.
         All the sets depicted in Figure 3.4a are convex, and so are a straight line,
         a triangle, a rectangle, and, more generally, any convex polygon,1 a circle, and
         the entire plane. On the other hand, the sets depicted in Figure 3.4b, any finite
         set of two or more distinct points, the boundary of any convex polygon, and a
         circumference are examples of sets that are not convex.
         Now we are ready for the notion of the convex hull. Intuitively, the convex
         hull of a set of n points in the plane is the smallest convex polygon that contains
         all of them either inside or on its boundary. If this formulation does not fire up
         your enthusiasm, consider the problem as one of barricading n sleeping tigers by
         a fence of the shortest length. This interpretation is due to D. Harel [Har92]; it is
         somewhat lively, however, because the fenceposts have to be erected right at the
         spots where some of the tigers sleep! There is another, much tamer interpretation
         of this notion. Imagine that the points in question are represented by nails driven
         into a large sheet of plywood representing the plane. Take a rubber band and
         stretch it to include all the nails, then let it snap into place. The convex hull is the
         area bounded by the snapped rubber band (Figure 3.5).
         A formal definition of the convex hull that is applicable to arbitrary sets,
         including sets of points that happen to lie on the same line, follows.
         DEFINITION  The convex hull of a set S of points is the smallest convex set
         containing S. (The "smallest" requirement means that the convex hull of S must
         be a subset of any convex set containing S.)
         If S is convex, its convex hull is obviously S itself. If S is a set of two points,
         its convex hull is the line segment connecting these points. If S is a set of three
     1.  By "a triangle, a rectangle, and, more generally, any convex polygon," we mean here a region, i.e., the
         set of points both inside and on the boundary of the shape in question.
                         (a)                                      (b)
FIGURE 3.4  (a)  Convex  sets.  (b)  Sets that are  not  convex.
FIGURE 3.5 Rubber-band interpretation of the convex hull.
points not on the same line, its convex hull is the triangle with the vertices at the
three points given; if the three points do lie on the same line, the convex hull is
the line segment with its endpoints at the two points that are farthest apart. For
an example of the convex hull for a larger set, see Figure 3.6.
A study of the examples makes the following theorem an expected result.
THEOREM     The convex hull of any set S of n > 2 points not all on the same line
is a convex polygon with the vertices at some of the points of S. (If all the points
do lie on the same line, the polygon degenerates to a line segment but still with
the endpoints at two points of S.)
                                                            p6
                       p7
                           p8                           p2
                   p3                   p4                                   p5
                                                        p1
     FIGURE   3.6  The convex hull for this set of eight    points  is  the  convex  polygon  with
                   vertices at p1, p5, p6, p7, and p3.
     The convex-hull problem is the problem of constructing the convex hull for
     a given set S of n points. To solve it, we need to find the points that will serve as
     the vertices of the polygon in question. Mathematicians call the vertices of such
     a polygon "extreme points." By definition, an extreme point of a convex set is a
     point of this set that is not a middle point of any line segment with endpoints in
     the set. For example, the extreme points of a triangle are its three vertices, the
     extreme points of a circle are all the points of its circumference, and the extreme
     points of the convex hull of the set of eight points in Figure 3.6 are p1, p5, p6, p7,
     and p3.
     Extreme points have several special properties other points of a convex set
     do not have. One of them is exploited by the simplex method, a very important
     algorithm discussed in Section 10.1. This algorithm solves linear programming
     problems, which are problems of finding a minimum or a maximum of a linear
     function of n variables subject to linear constraints (see Problem 12 in this section's
     exercises for an example and Sections 6.6 and 10.1 for a general discussion). Here,
     however, we are interested in extreme points because their identification solves
     the convex-hull problem. Actually, to solve this problem completely, we need to
     know a bit more than just which of n points of a given set are extreme points of the
     set's convex hull: we need to know which pairs of points need to be connected to
     form the boundary of the convex hull. Note that this issue can also be addressed
     by listing the extreme points in a clockwise or a counterclockwise order.
     So how can we solve the convex-hull problem in a brute-force manner? If you
     do not see an immediate plan for a frontal attack, do not be dismayed: the convex-
     hull problem is one with no obvious algorithmic solution. Nevertheless, there is a
     simple but inefficient algorithm that is based on the following observation about
     line segments making up the boundary of a convex hull: a line segment connecting
     two points pi and pj of a set of n points is a part of the convex hull's boundary if and
    only if all the other points of the set lie on the same side of the straight line through
    these two points.2 (Verify this property for the set in Figure 3.6.) Repeating this
    test for every pair of points yields a list of line segments that make up the convex
    hull's boundary.
        A few elementary facts from analytical geometry are needed to implement
    this algorithm. First, the straight line through two points (x1, y1), (x2, y2) in the
    coordinate plane can be defined by the equation
                        ax + by = c,
    where a = y2 - y1, b = x1 - x2, c = x1y2 - y1x2.
        Second, such a line divides the plane into two half-planes: for all the points
    in one of them, ax + by > c, while for all the points in the other, ax + by < c.
    (For the points on the line itself, of course, ax + by = c.) Thus, to check whether
    certain points lie on the same side of the line, we can simply check whether the
    expression ax + by - c has the same sign for each of these points. We leave the
    implementation details as an exercise.
        What is the time efficiency of this algorithm? It is in O(n3): for each of
    n(n - 1)/2 pairs of distinct points, we may need to find the sign of ax + by - c
    for each of the other n - 2 points. There are much more efficient algorithms for
    this important problem, and we discuss one of them later in the book.
    Exercises 3.3
    1.  Assuming that sqrt takes about 10 times longer than each of the other oper-
        ations in the innermost loop of BruteForceClosestPoints, which are assumed
        to take the same amount of time, estimate how much faster the algorithm will
        run after the improvement discussed in Section 3.3.
    2.  Can you design a more efficient algorithm than the one based on the brute-
        force strategy to solve the closest-pair problem for n points x1, x2, . . . , xn on
        the real line?
    3.  Let x1 < x2 < . . . < xn be real numbers representing coordinates of n villages
        located along a straight road. A post office needs to be built in one of these
        villages.
        a.  Design an efficient algorithm to find the post-office location minimizing
            the average distance between the villages and the post office.
        b. Design an efficient algorithm to find the post-office location minimizing
            the maximum distance from a village to the post office.
2.  For the sake of simplicity, we assume here that no three points of a given set lie on the same line. A
    modification needed for the general case is left for the exercises.
     4.  a.  There are several alternative ways to define a distance between two points
             p1(x1, y1) and p2(x2, y2) in the Cartesian plane. In particular, the Manhat-
             tan distance is defined as
                                    dM(p1, p2) = |x1 - x2| + |y1 - y2|.
             Prove that dM satisfies the following axioms, which every distance function
             must satisfy:
             i.    dM(p1, p2)  0 for any two points p1 and p2, and dM(p1, p2) = 0 if and
                   only if p1 = p2
             ii.   dM(p1, p2) = dM(p2, p1)
             iii.  dM(p1, p2)  dM(p1, p3) + dM(p3, p2) for any p1, p2, and p3
         b.  Sketch all the points in the Cartesian plane whose Manhattan distance to
             the origin (0, 0) is equal to 1. Do the same for the Euclidean distance.
         c.  True or false: A solution to the closest-pair problem does not depend on
             which of the two metrics--dE (Euclidean) or dM (Manhattan)--is used?
     5.  The Hamming distance between two strings of equal length is defined as the
         number of positions at which the corresponding symbols are different. It is
         named after Richard Hamming (1915­1998), a prominent American scientist
         and engineer, who introduced it in his seminal paper on error-detecting and
         error-correcting codes.
         a.  Does the Hamming distance satisfy the three axioms of a distance metric
             listed in Problem 4?
         b.  What is the time efficiency class of the brute-force algorithm for the closest-
             pair problem if the points in question are strings of m symbols long and the
             distance between two of them is measured by the Hamming distance?
     6.  Odd pie fight      There are n  3 people positioned on a field (Euclidean plane)
         so that each has a unique nearest neighbor. Each person has a cream pie. At a
         signal, everybody hurls his or her pie at the nearest neighbor. Assuming that
         n is odd and that nobody can miss his or her target, true or false: There always
         remains at least one person not hit by a pie. [Car79]
     7.  The closest-pair problem can be posed in the k-dimensional space, in which
         the Euclidean distance between two points p (x1, . . . , xk) and p (x1 , . . . , xk )
         is defined as
                                    d(p , p ) =  k       -      )2.
                                                 s=1(xs     xs
         What is the time-efficiency class of the brute-force algorithm for the k-
         dimensional closest-pair problem?
     8.  Find the convex hulls of the following sets and identify their extreme points
         (if they have any):
         a.  a line segment
          b. a square
          c.  the boundary of a square
          d. a straight line
     9.   Design a linear-time algorithm to determine two extreme points of the convex
          hull of a given set of n > 1 points in the plane.
     10.  What modification needs to be made in the brute-force algorithm for the
          convex-hull problem to handle more than two points on the same straight
          line?
     11.  Write a program implementing the brute-force algorithm for the convex-hull
          problem.
     12.  Consider the following small instance of the linear programming problem:
                                maximize    3x + 5y
                                subject to           x+      y4
                                                     x + 3y  6
                                                     x  0, y  0.
          a.  Sketch, in the Cartesian plane, the problem's feasible region, defined as
              the set of points satisfying all the problem's constraints.
          b.  Identify the region's extreme points.
          c.  Solve this optimization problem by using the following theorem: A linear
              programming problem with a nonempty bounded feasible region always
              has a solution, which can be found at one of the extreme points of its
              feasible region.
