Depth-First Search and Breadth-First Search
The term "exhaustive search" can also be applied to two very important algorithms
          that systematically process all vertices and edges of a graph. These two traversal
          algorithms are depth-first search (DFS) and breadth-first search (BFS). These
          algorithms have proved to be very useful for many applications involving graphs in
          artificial intelligence and operations research. In addition, they are indispensable
          for efficient investigation of fundamental properties of graphs such as connectivity
          and cycle presence.
          Depth-First Search
          Depth-first search starts a graph's traversal at an arbitrary vertex by marking it
          as visited. On each iteration, the algorithm proceeds to an unvisited vertex that
          is adjacent to the one it is currently in. (If there are several such vertices, a tie
          can be resolved arbitrarily. As a practical matter, which of the adjacent unvisited
          candidates is chosen is dictated by the data structure representing the graph. In
          our examples, we always break ties by the alphabetical order of the vertices.) This
          process continues until a dead end--a vertex with no adjacent unvisited vertices--
          is encountered. At a dead end, the algorithm backs up one edge to the vertex
          it came from and tries to continue visiting unvisited vertices from there. The
          algorithm eventually halts after backing up to the starting vertex, with the latter
          being a dead end. By then, all the vertices in the same connected component as the
          starting vertex have been visited. If unvisited vertices still remain, the depth-first
          search must be restarted at any one of them.
          It is convenient to use a stack to trace the operation of depth-first search. We
          push a vertex onto the stack when the vertex is reached for the first time (i.e., the
                                                                  a                      g
g                             h
                                                 e 6, 2           c                      h
   a                    e                        b 5, 3  j10,7
       c             f                    d3, 1  f4, 4   i 9, 8   d  f                   i
                                          c2, 5          h8, 9
   d                    b                 a1, 6          g7,10                           j
                                                                     b
j                             i
                                                                     e
             (a)                                 (b)                 (c)
FIGURE 3.10  Example of a DFS traversal. (a) Graph. (b) Traversal's stack (the first
             subscript number indicates the order in which a vertex is visited, i.e.,
             pushed onto the stack; the second one indicates the order in which it
             becomes a dead-end, i.e., popped off the stack). (c) DFS forest with the
             tree and back edges shown with solid and dashed lines, respectively.
visit of the vertex starts), and we pop a vertex off the stack when it becomes a
dead end (i.e., the visit of the vertex ends).
   It is also very useful to accompany a depth-first search traversal by construct-
ing the so-called depth-first search forest. The starting vertex of the traversal
serves as the root of the first tree in such a forest. Whenever a new unvisited vertex
is reached for the first time, it is attached as a child to the vertex from which it is
being reached. Such an edge is called a tree edge because the set of all such edges
forms a forest. The algorithm may also encounter an edge leading to a previously
visited vertex other than its immediate predecessor (i.e., its parent in the tree).
Such an edge is called a back edge because it connects a vertex to its ancestor,
other than the parent, in the depth-first search forest. Figure 3.10 provides an ex-
ample of a depth-first search traversal, with the traversal stack and corresponding
depth-first search forest shown as well.
   Here is pseudocode of the depth-first search.
ALGORITHM    DFS(G)
   //Implements a depth-first search traversal of a given graph
   //Input: Graph G =   V, E
   //Output: Graph G with its vertices marked with consecutive integers
   //        in the order they are first encountered by the DFS traversal
   mark each vertex in V with 0 as a mark of being "unvisited"
   count  0
   for each vertex v in V do
       if v is marked with 0
             dfs(v)
         dfs(v)
         //visits recursively all the unvisited vertices connected to vertex v
         //by a path and numbers them in the order they are encountered
         //via global variable count
         count  count + 1;         mark v with count
         for each vertex w in V adjacent to v do
         if w is marked with 0
                          dfs(w)
         The brevity of the DFS pseudocode and the ease with which it can be per-
         formed by hand may create a wrong impression about the level of sophistication
         of this algorithm. To appreciate its true power and depth, you should trace the
         algorithm's action by looking not at a graph's diagram but at its adjacency matrix
         or adjacency lists. (Try it for the graph in Figure 3.10 or a smaller example.)
         How efficient is depth-first search? It is not difficult to see that this algorithm
         is, in fact, quite efficient since it takes just the time proportional to the size of the
         data structure used for representing the graph in question. Thus, for the adjacency
         matrix representation, the traversal time is in     (|V |2), and for the adjacency list
         representation, it is in  (|V | + |E|) where |V | and |E| are the number of the
         graph's vertices and edges, respectively.
         A DFS forest, which is obtained as a by-product of a DFS traversal, deserves a
         few comments, too. To begin with, it is not actually a forest. Rather, we can look at
         it as the given graph with its edges classified by the DFS traversal into two disjoint
         classes: tree edges and back edges. (No other types are possible for a DFS forest
         of an undirected graph.) Again, tree edges are edges used by the DFS traversal to
         reach previously unvisited vertices. If we consider only the edges in this class, we
         will indeed get a forest. Back edges connect vertices to previously visited vertices
         other than their immediate predecessors in the traversal. They connect vertices to
         their ancestors in the forest other than their parents.
         A DFS traversal itself and the forest-like representation of the graph it pro-
         vides have proved to be extremely helpful for the development of efficient al-
         gorithms for checking many important properties of graphs.3 Note that the DFS
         yields two orderings of vertices: the order in which the vertices are reached for the
         first time (pushed onto the stack) and the order in which the vertices become dead
         ends (popped off the stack). These orders are qualitatively different, and various
         applications can take advantage of either of them.
         Important elementary applications of DFS include checking connectivity and
         checking acyclicity of a graph. Since dfs halts after visiting all the vertices con-
     3.  The discovery of several such applications was an important breakthrough achieved by the two
         American computer scientists John Hopcroft and Robert Tarjan in the 1970s. For this and other
         contributions, they were given the Turing Award--the most prestigious prize in the computing field
         [Hop87, Tar87].
nected by a path to the starting vertex, checking a graph's connectivity can be
done as follows. Start a DFS traversal at an arbitrary vertex and check, after
the algorithm halts, whether all the vertices of the graph will have been vis-
ited. If they have, the graph is connected; otherwise, it is not connected. More
generally, we can use DFS for identifying connected components of a graph
(how?).
As for checking for a cycle presence in a graph, we can take advantage of the
graph's representation in the form of a DFS forest. If the latter does not have back
edges, the graph is clearly acyclic. If there is a back edge from some vertex u to its
ancestor v (e.g., the back edge from d to a in Figure 3.10c), the graph has a cycle
that comprises the path from v to u via a sequence of tree edges in the DFS forest
followed by the back edge from u to v.
You will find a few other applications of DFS later in the book, although
more sophisticated applications, such as finding articulation points of a graph,
are not included. (A vertex of a connected graph is said to be its articulation
point if its removal with all edges incident to it breaks the graph into disjoint
pieces.)
Breadth-First Search
If depth-first search is a traversal for the brave (the algorithm goes as far from
"home" as it can), breadth-first search is a traversal for the cautious. It proceeds in
a concentric manner by visiting first all the vertices that are adjacent to a starting
vertex, then all unvisited vertices two edges apart from it, and so on, until all
the vertices in the same connected component as the starting vertex are visited.
If there still remain unvisited vertices, the algorithm has to be restarted at an
arbitrary vertex of another connected component of the graph.
It is convenient to use a queue (note the difference from depth-first search!)
to trace the operation of breadth-first search. The queue is initialized with the
traversal's starting vertex, which is marked as visited. On each iteration, the
algorithm identifies all unvisited vertices that are adjacent to the front vertex,
marks them as visited, and adds them to the queue; after that, the front vertex is
removed from the queue.
Similarly to a DFS traversal, it is useful to accompany a BFS traversal by con-
structing the so-called breadth-first search forest. The traversal's starting vertex
serves as the root of the first tree in such a forest. Whenever a new unvisited vertex
is reached for the first time, the vertex is attached as a child to the vertex it is being
reached from with an edge called a tree edge. If an edge leading to a previously
visited vertex other than its immediate predecessor (i.e., its parent in the tree)
is encountered, the edge is noted as a cross edge. Figure 3.11 provides an exam-
ple of a breadth-first search traversal, with the traversal queue and corresponding
breadth-first search forest shown.
     g                                  h
                                                                     a                g
        a                     e
                c          f               a1 c2 d3 e4 f5 b6  c      d     e       h            j
                                           g7 h8 j9 i10
        d                     b
                                                              f            b       i
     j                                  i
                   (a)                     (b)                                (c)
     FIGURE  3.11  Example of a BFS traversal. (a) Graph. (b) Traversal queue, with the
                   numbers indicating the order in which the vertices are visited, i.e., added
                   to (and removed from) the queue. (c) BFS forest with the tree and cross
                   edges shown with solid and dotted lines, respectively.
        Here is pseudocode of the breadth-first search.
     ALGORITHM     BFS(G)
        //Implements a breadth-first search traversal of a given graph
        //Input: Graph G =    V, E
        //Output: Graph G with its vertices marked with consecutive integers
        //         in the order they are visited by the BFS traversal
        mark each vertex in V with 0 as a mark of being "unvisited"
        count  0
        for each vertex v in V do
             if v is marked with 0
                   bfs(v)
        bfs(v)
        //visits all the unvisited vertices connected to vertex v
        //by a path and numbers them in the order they are visited
        //via global variable count
        count  count + 1;     mark v with count and initialize a queue with v
        while the queue is not empty do
             for each vertex w in V adjacent to the front vertex do
                   if w is marked with 0
                   count  count + 1;       mark w with count
                   add w to the queue
             remove the front vertex from the queue
                                                                        a
a            b             c  d
                                                                b          e
e            f             g  h                       c            f
                                 d                           g
                  (a)                                              (b)
FIGURE 3.12  Illustration of the BFS-based algorithm for finding a minimum-edge path.
             (a) Graph. (b) Part of its BFS tree that identifies the minimum-edge path
             from a to g.
Breadth-first search has the same efficiency as depth-first search: it is in
(|V |2) for the adjacency matrix representation and in       (|V | + |E|) for the adja-
cency list representation. Unlike depth-first search, it yields a single ordering of
vertices because the queue is a FIFO (first-in first-out) structure and hence the
order in which vertices are added to the queue is the same order in which they
are removed from it. As to the structure of a BFS forest of an undirected graph,
it can also have two kinds of edges: tree edges and cross edges. Tree edges are the
ones used to reach previously unvisited vertices. Cross edges connect vertices to
those visited before, but, unlike back edges in a DFS tree, they connect vertices
either on the same or adjacent levels of a BFS tree.
BFS can be used to check connectivity and acyclicity of a graph, essentially
in the same manner as DFS can. It is not applicable, however, for several less
straightforward applications such as finding articulation points. On the other hand,
it can be helpful in some situations where DFS cannot. For example, BFS can
be used for finding a path with the fewest number of edges between two given
vertices. To do this, we start a BFS traversal at one of the two vertices and stop
it as soon as the other vertex is reached. The simple path from the root of the
BFS tree to the second vertex is the path sought. For example, path a - b - c - g
in the graph in Figure 3.12 has the fewest number of edges among all the paths
between vertices a and g. Although the correctness of this application appears to
stem immediately from the way BFS operates, a mathematical proof of its validity
is not quite elementary (see, e.g., [Cor09, Section 22.2]).
Table 3.1 summarizes the main facts about depth-first search and breadth-first
search.
         TABLE 3.1 Main facts about depth-first search (DFS)
             and breadth-first search (BFS)
                                                DFS                  BFS
         Data structure                         a stack              a queue
         Number of vertex orderings             two orderings        one ordering
         Edge types (undirected graphs)         tree and back edges  tree and cross edges
         Applications                           connectivity,        connectivity,
                                                acyclicity,          acyclicity,
                                                articulation points  minimum-edge paths
         Efficiency for adjacency matrix        (|V 2|)              (|V 2|)
         Efficiency for adjacency lists         (|V | + |E|)         (|V | + |E|)
     Exercises 3.5
     1. Consider the following graph.
                                          f     b        c        g
                                             d       a         e
         a.  Write down the adjacency matrix and adjacency lists specifying this graph.
             (Assume that the matrix rows and columns and vertices in the adjacency
             lists follow in the alphabetical order of the vertex labels.)
         b.  Starting at vertex a and resolving ties by the vertex alphabetical order,
             traverse the graph by depth-first search and construct the corresponding
             depth-first search tree. Give the order in which the vertices were reached
             for the first time (pushed onto the traversal stack) and the order in which
             the vertices became dead ends (popped off the stack).
     2.  If we define sparse graphs as graphs for which |E|  O(|V |), which implemen-
         tation of DFS will have a better time efficiency for such graphs, the one that
         uses the adjacency matrix or the one that uses the adjacency lists?
     3.  Let G be a graph with n vertices and m edges.
         a.  True or false: All its DFS forests (for traversals starting at different ver-
             tices) will have the same number of trees?
         b. True or false: All its DFS forests will have the same number of tree edges
             and the same number of back edges?
     4.  Traverse the graph of Problem 1 by breadth-first search and construct the
         corresponding breadth-first search tree. Start the traversal at vertex a and
         resolve ties by the vertex alphabetical order.
5.   Prove that a cross edge in a BFS tree of an undirected graph can connect
     vertices only on either the same level or on two adjacent levels of a BFS tree.
6.   a.  Explain how one can check a graph's acyclicity by using breadth-first
         search.
     b.  Does either of the two traversals--DFS or BFS--always find a cycle faster
         than the other? If you answer yes, indicate which of them is better and
         explain why it is the case; if you answer no, give two examples supporting
         your answer.
7.   Explain how one can identify connected components of a graph by using
     a.  a depth-first search.
     b. a breadth-first search.
8.   A graph is said to be bipartite if all its vertices can be partitioned into two
     disjoint subsets X and Y so that every edge connects a vertex in X with a vertex
     in Y . (One can also say that a graph is bipartite if its vertices can be colored in
     two colors so that every edge has its vertices colored in different colors; such
     graphs are also called 2-colorable.) For example, graph (i) is bipartite while
     graph (ii) is not.
                         x1      y1   x3                  a        b
                         y2      x2   y3                  c        d
                                 (i)                         (ii)
     a.  Design a DFS-based algorithm for checking whether a graph is bipartite.
     b. Design a BFS-based algorithm for checking whether a graph is bipartite.
9.   Write a program that, for a given graph, outputs:
     a.  vertices of each connected component
     b. its cycle or a message that the graph is acyclic
10.  One can model a maze by having a vertex for a starting point, a finishing point,
     dead ends, and all the points in the maze where more than one path can be
     taken, and then connecting the vertices according to the paths in the maze.
     a.  Construct such a graph for the following maze.
          b. Which traversal--DFS or BFS--would you use if you found yourself in a
             maze and why?
     11.  Three Jugs   Sime´ on Denis Poisson (1781­1840), a famous French mathemati-
          cian and physicist, is said to have become interested in mathematics after
          encountering some version of the following old puzzle. Given an 8-pint jug
          full of water and two empty jugs of 5- and 3-pint capacity, get exactly 4 pints
          of water in one of the jugs by completely filling up and/or emptying jugs into
          others. Solve this puzzle by using breadth-first search.
     SUMMARY
          Brute force is a straightforward approach to solving a problem, usually directly
          based on the problem statement and definitions of the concepts involved.
          The principal strengths of the brute-force approach are wide applicability and
          simplicity; its principal weakness is the subpar efficiency of most brute-force
          algorithms.
          A first application of the brute-force approach often results in an algorithm
          that can be improved with a modest amount of effort.
          The following noted algorithms can be considered as examples of the brute-
          force approach:
          .  definition-based algorithm for matrix multiplication
          .  selection sort
          .  sequential search
          .  straightforward string-matching algorithm
          Exhaustive search is a brute-force approach to combinatorial problems. It
          suggests generating each and every combinatorial object of the problem,
          selecting those of them that satisfy all the constraints, and then finding a
          desired object.
          The traveling salesman problem, the knapsack problem, and the assignment
          problem are typical examples of problems that can be solved, at least
          theoretically, by exhaustive-search algorithms.
          Exhaustive search is impractical for all but very small instances of problems
          it can be applied to.
          Depth-first search (DFS) and breadth-first search (BFS) are two principal
          graph-traversal algorithms. By representing a graph in a form of a depth-first
          or breadth-first search forest, they help in the investigation of many important
          properties of the graph. Both algorithms have the same time efficiency:
             (|V |2) for the adjacency matrix representation and    (|V | + |E|) for the
          adjacency list representation.
