of several versions of the fake coin identification problem we consider here the one that best illustrates the decrease by a constant factor strategy. among n identical looking coins one is fake. with a balance scale we can compare any two sets of coins. that is by tipping to the left to the right or staying even the balance scale will tell whether the sets weigh the same or which of the sets is heavier than the other but not by how much. the problem is to design an efficient algorithm for detecting the fake coin. an easier version of the problem the one we discuss here assumes that the fake coin is known to be say lighter than the genuine one. the most natural idea for solving this problem is to divide n coins into two piles of n coins each leaving one extra coin aside if n is odd and put the two . a much more challenging version assumes no additional information about the relative weights of the fake and genuine coins or even the presence of the fake coin among n given coins. we pursue this more difficult version in the exercises for section . . piles on the scale. if the piles weigh the same the coin put aside must be fake otherwise we can proceed in the same manner with the lighter pile which must be the one with the fake coin. we can easily set up a recurrence relation for the number of weighings w n needed by this algorithm in the worst case w n w n for n w . this recurrence should look familiar to you. indeed it is almost identical to the one for the worst case number of comparisons in binary search. the difference is in the initial condition. this similarity is not really surprising since both algorithms are based on the same technique of halving an instance size. the solution to the recurrence for the number of weighings is also very similar to the one we had for binary search w n log n . this stuff should look elementary by now if not outright boring. but wait the interesting point here is the fact that the above algorithm is not the most efficient solution. it would be more efficient to divide the coins not into two but into three piles of about n coins each. details of a precise formulation are developed in this section's exercises. do not miss it! if your instructor forgets demand the instructor to assign problem . after weighing two of the piles we can reduce the instance size by a factor of three. accordingly we should expect the number of weighings to be about log n which is smaller than log n. 