Let us revisit the convex-hull problem, introduced in Section 3.3: find the smallest
     convex polygon that contains n given points in the plane. We consider here a
     divide-and-conquer algorithm called quickhull because of its resemblance to
     quicksort.
     Let S be a set of n > 1 points p1(x1, y1), . . . , pn(xn, yn) in the Cartesian plane.
     We assume that the points are sorted in nondecreasing order of their x coordinates,
     with ties resolved by increasing order of the y coordinates of the points involved.
     It is not difficult to prove the geometrically obvious fact that the leftmost point
     p1 and the rightmost point pn are two distinct extreme points of the set's convex
     hull (Figure 5.8). Let p--1-pn be the straight line through points p1 and pn directed
     from p1 to pn. This line separates the points of S into two sets: S1 is the set of
     points to the left of this line, and S2 is the set of points to the right of this line.
     (We say that point q3 is to the left of the line q--1-q-2 directed from point q1 to point
     q2 if q1q2q3 forms a counterclockwise cycle. Later, we cite an analytical way to
     check this condition, based on checking the sign of a determinant formed by the
     coordinates of the three points.) The points of S on the line -p-1-pn, other than p1
     and pn, cannot be extreme points of the convex hull and hence are excluded from
     further consideration.
     The boundary of the convex hull of S is made up of two polygonal chains:
     an "upper" boundary and a "lower" boundary. The "upper" boundary, called the
     upper hull, is a sequence of line segments with vertices at p1, some of the points
     in S1 (if S1 is not empty) and pn. The "lower" boundary, called the lower hull, is
     a sequence of line segments with vertices at p1, some of the points in S2 (if S2 is
     not empty) and pn. The fact that the convex hull of the entire set S is composed
     of the upper and lower hulls, which can be constructed independently and in a
     similar fashion, is a very useful observation exploited by several algorithms for
     this problem.
     For concreteness, let us discuss how quickhull proceeds to construct the upper
     hull; the lower hull can be constructed in the same manner. If S1 is empty, the
                                                                                pn
     p1
     FIGURE 5.8  Upper and lower hulls of a set of points.
                                        pmax
                                                                                pn
     p1
     FIGURE 5.9 The idea of quickhull.
     upper hull is simply the line segment with the endpoints at p1 and pn. If S1 is not
     empty, the algorithm identifies point pmax in S1, which is the farthest from the line
     p--1-pn (Figure 5.9). If there is a tie, the point that maximizes the angle
                                                                                    pmaxppn
     can be selected. (Note that point pmax maximizes the area of the triangle with
     two vertices at p1 and pn and the third one at some other point of S1.) Then the
     algorithm identifies all the points of set S1 that are to the left of the line -p-1-pmax;
     these are the points that will make up the set S1,1. The points of S1 to the left of
     the line -p-m--a-x-pn will make up the set S1,2. It is not difficult to prove the following:
     pmax is a vertex of the upper hull.
     The points inside   p1pmaxpn cannot be vertices of the upper hull (and hence
     can be eliminated from further consideration).
     There are no points to the left of both lines p--1-pmax and p--m--a-x-pn.
     Therefore, the algorithm can continue constructing the upper hulls of p1 
     S1,1  pmax and pmax  S1,2  pn recursively and then simply concatenate them to
     get the upper hull of the entire set p1  S1  pn.
         Now we have to figure out how the algorithm's geometric operations can be
     actually implemented. Fortunately, we can take advantage of the following very
     useful fact from analytical geometry: if q1(x1, y1), q2(x2, y2), and q3(x3, y3) are
     three arbitrary points in the Cartesian plane, then the area of the triangle  q1q2q3
     is equal to one-half of the magnitude of the determinant
             x1  y1     1
             x2  y2     1  = x1y2 + x3y1 + x2y3 - x3y2 - x2y1 - x1y3,
             x3  y3     1
     while the sign of this expression is positive if and only if the point q3 = (x3, y3) is to
     the left of the line q---q. Using this formula, we can check in constant time whether
                 1   2
     a point lies to the left of the line determined by two other points as well as find
     the distance from the point to the line.
         Quickhull has the same  (n2) worst-case efficiency as quicksort (Problem 9
     in this section's exercises). In the average case, however, we should expect a
     much better performance. First, the algorithm should benefit from the quicksort-
     like savings from the on-average balanced split of the problem into two smaller
     subproblems. Second, a significant fraction of the points--namely, those inside
     p1pmaxpn (see Figure 5.9)--are eliminated from further processing. Under a
     natural assumption that points given are chosen randomly from a uniform dis-
     tribution over some convex region (e.g., a circle or a rectangle), the average-case
     efficiency of quickhull turns out to be linear [Ove80].
     Exercises 5.5
     1.  a.  For the one-dimensional version of the closest-pair problem, i.e., for the
             problem of finding two closest numbers among a given set of n real num-
             bers, design an algorithm that is directly based on the divide-and-conquer
             technique and determine its efficiency class.
         b.  Is it a good algorithm for this problem?
     2.  Prove that the divide-and-conquer algorithm for the closest-pair problem
         examines, for every point p in the vertical strip (see Figures 5.7a and 5.7b), no
         more than seven other points that can be closer to p than dmin, the minimum
         distance between two points encountered by the algorithm up to that point.
     3.  Consider the version of the divide-and-conquer two-dimensional closest-pair
         algorithm in which, instead of presorting input set P , we simply sort each of
         the two sets Pl and Pr in nondecreasing order of their y coordinates on each
         recursive call. Assuming that sorting is done by mergesort, set up a recurrence
         relation for the running time in the worst case and solve it for n = 2k.
     4.  Implement the divide-and-conquer closest-pair algorithm, outlined in this
         section, in the language of your choice.
     5.   Find on the Web a visualization of an algorithm for the closest-pair problem.
          What algorithm does this visualization represent?
     6.   The Voronoi polygon for a point p of a set S of points in the plane is defined
          to be the perimeter of the set of all points in the plane closer to p than to any
          other point in S. The union of all the Voronoi polygons of the points in S is
          called the Voronoi diagram of S.
          a.  What is the Voronoi diagram for a set of three points?
          b.  Find a visualization of an algorithm for generating the Voronoi diagram
              on the Web and study a few examples of such diagrams. Based on your
              observations, can you tell how the solution to the previous question is
              generalized to the general case?
     7.   Explain how one can find point pmax in the quickhull algorithm analytically.
     8.   What is the best-case efficiency of quickhull?
     9.   Give a specific example of inputs that make quickhull run in quadratic time.
     10.  Implement quickhull in the language of your choice.
     11.  Creating decagons     There are 1000 points in the plane, no three of them
          on the same line. Devise an algorithm to construct 100 decagons with their
          vertices at these points. The decagons need not be convex, but each of them
          has to be simple, i.e., its boundary should not cross itself, and no two decagons
          may have a common point.
     12.  Shortest path around     There is a fenced area in the two-dimensional Eu-
          clidean  plane  in  the  shape  of  a  convex   polygon  with  vertices  at  points
          p1(x1, y1), p2(x2, y2), . . . , pn(xn, yn) (not necessarily in this order). There are
          two more points, a(xa, ya) and b(xb, yb) such that xa < min{x1, x2, . . . , xn} and
          xb > max{x1, x2, . . . , xn}. Design a reasonably efficient algorithm for comput-
          ing the length of the shortest path between a and b. [ORo98]
     SUMMARY
          Divide-and-conquer is a general algorithm design technique that solves a
          problem by dividing it into several smaller subproblems of the same type
          (ideally, of about equal size), solving each of them recursively, and then
          combining their solutions to get a solution to the original problem. Many
          efficient algorithms are based on this technique, although it can be both
          inapplicable and inferior to simpler algorithmic solutions.
          Running time T (n) of many divide-and-conquer algorithms satisfies the
          recurrence T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n). The Master Theorem establishes the order
          of growth of its solutions.
          Mergesort is a divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm. It works by dividing an
          input array into two halves, sorting them recursively, and then merging the two
sorted halves to get the original array sorted. The algorithm's time efficiency
is in  (n log n) in all cases, with the number of key comparisons being very
close to the theoretical minimum. Its principal drawback is a significant extra
storage requirement.
Quicksort is a divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm that works by partition-
ing its input elements according to their value relative to some preselected
element. Quicksort is noted for its superior efficiency among n log n al-
gorithms for sorting randomly ordered arrays but also for the quadratic
worst-case efficiency.
The classic traversals of a binary tree--preorder, inorder, and postorder--
and similar algorithms that require recursive processing of both left and right
subtrees can be considered examples of the divide-and-conquer technique.
Their analysis is helped by replacing all the empty subtrees of a given tree by
special external nodes.
There is a divide-and-conquer algorithm for multiplying two n-digit integers
that requires about n1.585 one-digit multiplications.
Strassen's algorithm needs only seven multiplications to multiply two 2 × 2
matrices. By exploiting the divide-and-conquer technique, this algorithm can
multiply two n × n matrices with about n2.807 multiplications.
The divide-and-conquer technique can be successfully applied to two impor-
tant problems of computational geometry: the closest-pair problem and the
convex-hull problem.

