gaussian elimination has an interesting and very useful byproduct called lu decomposition of the coefficient matrix. in fact modern commercial implementations of gaussian elimination are based on such a decomposition rather than on the basic algorithm outlined above. example let us return to the example in the beginning of this section where we applied gaussian elimination to the matrix . as we mentioned in section . on some computers multiplication is not necessarily more expensive than addition subtraction. for this algorithm this point is moot since we can simply count the number of times the innermost loop is executed which is of course exactly the same number as the number of multiplications and the number of subtractions there. a . consider the lower triangular matrix l made up of 's on its main diagonal and the row multiples used in the forward elimination process l and the upper triangular matrix u that was the result of this elimination u . it turns out that the product lu of these matrices is equal to matrix a. for this particular pair of l and u you can verify this fact by direct multiplication but as a general proposition it needs of course a proof which we omit here. therefore solving the system ax b is equivalent to solving the system lu x b. the latter system can be solved as follows. denote y u x then ly b. solve the system ly b first which is easy to do because l is a lower triangular matrix then solve the system u x y with the upper triangular matrix u to find x. thus for the system at the beginning of this section we first solve ly b y y . y its solution is y y y . y y y solving u x y means solving x x x and the solution is x x x x x x . note that once we have the lu decomposition of matrix a we can solve systems ax b with as many right hand side vectors b as we want to one at a time. this is a distinct advantage over the classic gaussian elimination discussed earlier. also note that the lu decomposition does not actually require extra memory because we can store the nonzero part of u in the upper triangular part of a including the main diagonal and store the nontrivial part of l below the main diagonal of a. 