here is my version of a well known joke about mathematicians. professor x a noted mathematician noticed that when his wife wanted to boil water for their tea she took their kettle from their cupboard filled it with water and put it on the stove. once when his wife was away if you have to know she was signing her best seller in a local bookstore the professor had to boil water by himself. he saw that the kettle was sitting on the kitchen counter. what did professor x do? he put the kettle in the cupboard first and then proceeded to follow his wife's routine. reduction alg. a problem problem solution to be solved solvable by alg. a to problem figure . problem reduction strategy. the way professor x approached his task is an example of an important problem solving strategy called problem reduction. if you need to solve a problem reduce it to another problem that you know how to solve figure . . the joke about the professor notwithstanding the idea of problem reduction plays a central role in theoretical computer science where it is used to classify problems according to their complexity. we will touch on this classification in chapter . but the strategy can be used for actual problem solving too. the practical difficulty in applying it lies of course in finding a problem to which the problem at hand should be reduced. moreover if we want our efforts to be of practical value we need our reduction based algorithm to be more efficient than solving the original problem directly. note that we have already encountered this technique earlier in the book. in section . for example we mentioned the so called synthetic division done by applying horner's rule for polynomial evaluation. in section . we used the following fact from analytical geometry if p x y p x y and p x y are three arbitrary points in the plane then the determinant x y x y x y x y x y x y x y x y x y is positive if and only if the point p is to the left of the directed line p p through points p and p . in other words we reduced a geometric question about the relative locations of three points to a question about the sign of a determinant. in fact the entire idea of analytical geometry is based on reducing geometric problems to algebraic ones. and the vast majority of geometric algorithms take advantage of this historic insight by rene descartes . in this section we give a few more examples of algorithms based on the strategy of problem reduction. 