Our next example deals with solving optimization problems. If a problem asks to
find a maximum of some function, it is said to be a maximization problem; if it
asks to find a function's minimum, it is called a minimization problem. Suppose
now that you need to find a minimum of some function f (x) and you have an
algorithm for function maximization. How can you take advantage of the latter?
The answer lies in the simple formula
                        min f (x) = - max[-f (x)].
In other words, to minimize a function, we can maximize its negative instead and,
to get a correct minimal value of the function itself, change the sign of the answer.
This property is illustrated for a function of one real variable in Figure 6.17.
Of course, the formula
                        max f (x) = - min[-f (x)]
is valid as well; it shows how a maximization problem can be reduced to an
equivalent minimization problem.
This relationship between minimization and maximization problems is very
general: it holds for functions defined on any domain D. In particular, we can
        y
                                                                              f (x )
f (x*)
                        x*                                                        x
­f (x*)
                                                                              ­f (x )
FIGURE  6.17  Relationship between minimization  and  maximization problems:
              min f (x) = - max[-f (x)].
     apply it to functions of several variables subject to additional constraints. A very
     important class of such problems is introduced below in this section.
     Now that we are on the topic of function optimization, it is worth pointing out
     that the standard calculus procedure for finding extremum points of a function is,
     in fact, also based on problem reduction. Indeed, it suggests finding the function's
     derivative f (x) and then solving the equation f (x) = 0 to find the function's
     critical points. In other words, the optimization problem is reduced to the problem
     of solving an equation as the principal part of finding extremum points. Note
     that we are not calling the calculus procedure an algorithm, since it is not clearly
     defined. In fact, there is no general method for solving equations. A little secret of
     calculus textbooks is that problems are carefully selected so that critical points
     can always be found without difficulty. This makes the lives of both students
     and instructors easier but, in the process, may unintentionally create a wrong
     impression in students' minds.
