our task now is to translate the geometric description of the simplex method into the more algorithmically precise language of algebra. to begin with before we can apply the simplex method to a linear programming problem it has to be represented in a special form called the standard form. the standard form has the following requirements it must be a maximization problem. all the constraints except the nonnegativity constraints must be in the form of linear equations with nonnegative right hand sides. all the variables must be required to be nonnegative. thus the general linear programming problem in standard form with m constraints and n unknowns n m is maximize c x . . . cnxn subject to ai x . . . ainxn bi where bi for i . . . m . x . . . xn . it can also be written in compact matrix notations maximize cx subject to ax b x where x b x x... a a... a ... ... a ...n b b... . c c c . . . cn xn am am ... amn bm any linear programming problem can be transformed into an equivalent problem in standard form. if an objective function needs to be minimized it can be replaced by the equivalent problem of maximizing the same objective function with all its coefficients cj replaced by cj j . . . n see section . for a more general discussion of such transformations . if a constraint is given as an inequality it can be replaced by an equivalent equation by adding a slack variable representing the difference between the two sides of the original inequality. for example the two inequalities of problem . can be transformed respectively into the following equations x y u where u and x y v where v . finally in most linear programming problems the variables are required to be nonnegative to begin with because they represent some physical quantities. if this is not the case in an initial statement of a problem an unconstrained variable xj can be replaced by the difference between two new nonnegative variables xj xj xj xj xj . thus problem . in standard form is the following linear programming problem in four variables maximize x y u v subject to x y u . x y v x y u v . it is easy to see that if we find an optimal solution x y u v to problem . we can obtain an optimal solution to problem . by simply ignoring its last two coordinates. the principal advantage of the standard form lies in the simple mechanism it provides for identifying extreme points of the feasible region. to do this for problem . for example we need to set two of the four variables in the constraint equations to zero to get a system of two linear equations in two unknowns and solve this system. for the general case of a problem with m equations in n unknowns n m n m variables need to be set to zero to get a system of m equations in m unknowns. if the system obtained has a unique solution as any nondegenerate system of linear equations with the number of equations equal to the number of unknowns does we have a basic solution its coordinates set to zero before solving the system are called nonbasic and its coordinates obtained by solving the system are called basic. this terminology comes from linear algebra. specifically we can rewrite the system of constraint equations of . as x y u v . a basis in the two dimensional vector space is composed of any two vectors that are not proportional to each other once a basis is chosen any vector can be uniquely expressed as a sum of multiples of the basis vectors. basic and nonbasic variables indicate which of the given vectors are respectively included and excluded in a particular basis choice. if all the coordinates of a basic solution are nonnegative the basic solution is called a basic feasible solution. for example if we set to zero variables x and y and solve the resulting system for u and v we obtain the basic feasible solution if we set to zero variables x and u and solve the resulting system for y and v we obtain the basic solution which is not feasible. the importance of basic feasible solutions lies in the one to one correspondence between them and the extreme points of the feasible region. for example is an extreme point of the feasible region of problem . with the point in figure . being its projection on the x y plane . incidentally is a natural starting point for the simplex method's application to this problem. as mentioned above the simplex method progresses through a series of adjacent extreme points basic feasible solutions with increasing values of the objective function. each such point can be represented by a simplex tableau a table storing the information about the basic feasible solution corresponding to the extreme point. for example the simplex tableau for of problem . is presented below x y u v u v . in general a simplex tableau for a linear programming problem in standard form with n unknowns and m linear equality constraints n m has m rows and n columns. each of the first m rows of the table contains the coefficients of a corresponding constraint equation with the last column's entry containing the equation's right hand side. the columns except the last one are labeled by the names of the variables. the rows are labeled by the basic variables of the basic feasible solution the tableau represents the values of the basic variables of this solution are in the last column. also note that the columns labeled by the basic variables form the m m identity matrix. the last row of a simplex tableau is called the objective row. it is initialized by the coefficients of the objective function with their signs reversed in the first n columns and the value of the objective function at the initial point in the last column . on subsequent iterations the objective row is transformed the same way as all the other rows. the objective row is used by the simplex method to check whether the current tableau represents an optimal solution it does if all the entries in the objective row except possibly the one in the last column are nonnegative. if this is not the case any of the negative entries indicates a nonbasic variable that can become basic in the next tableau. for example according to this criterion the basic feasible solution represented by tableau . is not optimal. the negative value in the x column signals the fact that we can increase the value of the objective function z x y u v by increasing the value of the x coordinate in the current basic feasible solution . indeed since the coefficient for x in the objective function is positive the larger the x value the larger the value of this function. of course we will need to compensate an increase in x by adjusting the values of the basic variables u and v so that the new point is still feasible. for this to be the case both conditions x u where u x v where v must be satisfied which means that x min . note that if we increase the value of x from to the largest amount possible we will find ourselves at the point an adjacent to extreme point of the feasible region with z . similarly the negative value in the y column of the objective row signals the fact that we can also increase the value of the objective function by increasing the value of the y coordinate in the initial basic feasible solution . this requires y u where u y v where v which means that y min . if we increase the value of y from to the largest amount possible we will find ourselves at the point another adjacent to extreme point with z . if there are several negative entries in the objective row a commonly used rule is to select the most negative one i.e. the negative number with the largest absolute value. this rule is motivated by the observation that such a choice yields the largest increase in the objective function's value per unit of change in a variable's value. in our example an increase in the x value from to at changes the value of z x y u v from to while an increase in the y value from to at changes z from to . note however that the feasibility constraints impose different limits on how much each of the variables may increase. in our example in particular the choice of the y variable over the x variable leads to a smaller increase in the value of the objective function. still we will employ this commonly used rule and select variable y as we continue with our example. a new basic variable is called the entering variable while its column is referred to as the pivot column we mark the pivot column by . now we will explain how to choose a departing variable i.e. a basic variable to become nonbasic in the next tableau. the total number of basic variables in any basic solution must be equal to m the number of the equality constraints. as we saw above to get to an adjacent extreme point with a larger value of the objective function we need to increase the entering variable by the largest amount possible to make one of the old basic variables zero while preserving the nonnegativity of all the others. we can translate this observation into the following rule for choosing a departing variable in a simplex tableau for each positive entry in the pivot column compute the ratio by dividing the row's last entry by the entry in the pivot column. for the example of tableau . these ratios are u v . the row with the smallest ratio determines the departing variable i.e. the variable to become nonbasic. ties may be broken arbitrarily. for our example it is variable v. we mark the row of the departing variable called the pivot row by and denote it ro w . note that if there are no positive entries in the pivot column no ratio can be computed which indicates that the problem is unbounded and the algorithm stops. finally the following steps need to be taken to transform a current tableau into the next one. this transformation called pivoting is similar to the principal step of the gauss jordan elimination algorithm for solving systems of linear equations see problem in exercises . . first divide all the entries of the pivot row by the pivot its entry in the pivot column to obtain ro w new. for tableau . we obtain ro w new . then replace each of the other rows including the objective row by the difference row c . ro w new where c is the row's entry in the pivot column. for tableau . this yields row . ro w new row . ro w new . thus the simplex method transforms tableau . into the following tableau x y u v u y . tableau . represents the basic feasible solution with an increased value of the objective function which is equal to . it is not optimal however why? . the next iteration do it yourself as a good exercise! yields tableau . x y u v x y . this tableau represents the basic feasible solution . it is optimal because all the entries in the objective row of tableau . are nonnegative. the maximal value of the objective function is equal to the last entry in the objective row. let us summarize the steps of the simplex method. summary of the simplex method step initialization present a given linear programming problem in standard form and set up an initial tableau with nonnegative entries in the rightmost column and m other columns composing the m m identity matrix. entries in the objective row are to be disregarded in verifying these requirements. these m columns define the basic variables of the initial basic feasible solution used as the labels of the tableau's rows. step optimality test if all the entries in the objective row except possibly the one in the rightmost column which represents the value of the objective function are nonnegative stop the tableau represents an optimal solution whose basic variables' values are in the rightmost column and the remaining nonbasic variables' values are zeros. step finding the entering variable select a negative entry from among the first n elements of the objective row. a commonly used rule is to select the negative entry with the largest absolute value with ties broken arbitrarily. mark its column to indicate the entering variable and the pivot column. step finding the departing variable for each positive entry in the pivot column calculate the ratio by dividing that row's entry in the rightmost column by its entry in the pivot column. if all the entries in the pivot column are negative or zero the problem is unbounded stop. find the row with the smallest ratio ties may be broken arbitrarily and mark this row to indicate the departing variable and the pivot row. step forming the next tableau divide all the entries in the pivot row by its entry in the pivot column. subtract from each of the other rows including the objective row the new pivot row multiplied by the entry in the pivot column of the row in question. this will make all the entries in the pivot column 's except for in the pivot row. replace the label of the pivot row by the variable's name of the pivot column and go back to step . 