The Maximum-Flow Problem
In this section, we consider the important problem of maximizing the flow of a ma-
      terial through a transportation network (pipeline system, communication system,
      electrical distribution system, and so on). We will assume that the transportation
      network in question can be represented by a connected weighted digraph with n
      vertices numbered from 1 to n and a set of edges E, with the following properties:
      It contains exactly one vertex with no entering edges; this vertex is called the
      source and assumed to be numbered 1.
      It contains exactly one vertex with no leaving edges; this vertex is called the
      sink and assumed to be numbered n.
      The weight uij of each directed edge (i, j ) is a positive integer, called the
      edge capacity. (This number represents the upper bound on the amount of
      the material that can be sent from i to j through a link represented by this
      edge.)
      A digraph satisfying these properties is called a flow network or simply a
      network.3 A small instance of a network is given in Figure 10.4.
      It is assumed that the source and the sink are the only source and destination
      of the material, respectively; all the other vertices can serve only as points where
      a flow can be redirected without consuming or adding any amount of the material.
      In other words, the total amount of the material entering an intermediate vertex
      must be equal to the total amount of the material leaving the vertex. This con-
      dition is called the flow-conservation requirement. If we denote the amount sent
      through edge (i, j ) by xij , then for any intermediate vertex i, the flow-conservation
      requirement can be expressed by the following equality constraint:
                          xji =                            xij  for i = 2, 3, . . . , n - 1,  (10.8)
              j : (j,i)E                      j : (i,j )E
3.    In a slightly more general model, one can consider a network with several sources and sinks and allow
      capacities uij to be infinitely large.
                                                                      5
                                                  3                             4
                      1         2            2       5                3         2       6
                             3                               1
                                             4
     FIGURE     10.4  Example of a network        graph. The vertex      numbers   are  vertex  "names";
                      the edge numbers are        edge capacities.
     where the sums in the left- and right-hand sides express the total inflow and outflow
     entering and leaving vertex i, respectively.
     Since no amount of the material can change by going through intermediate
     vertices of the network, it stands to reason that the total amount of the material
     leaving the source must end up at the sink. (This observation can also be derived
     formally from equalities (10.8), a task you will be asked to do in the exercises.)
     Thus, we have the following equality:
                                                  x1j =                  xj n.                        (10.9)
                                     j : (1,j )E             j : (j,n)E
     This quantity, the total outflow from the source--or, equivalently, the total inflow
     into the sink--is called the value of the flow. We denote it by v. It is this quantity
     that we will want to maximize over all possible flows in a network.
     Thus, a (feasible) flow is an assignment of real numbers xij to edges (i, j ) of
     a given network that satisfy flow-conservation constraints (10.8) and the capacity
     constraints
                             0  xij  uij          for every edge (i, j )  E.                          (10.10)
     The maximum-flow problem can be stated formally as the following optimization
     problem:
     maximize            v=                  x1j
                                j : (1,j )E
     subject to                      xji -                   xij = 0     for i = 2, 3, . . . , n - 1  (10.11)
                         j : (j,i)E             j : (i,j )E
                         0  xij  uij            for every edge (i, j )  E.
     We can solve linear programming problem (10.11) by the simplex method or
     by another algorithm for general linear programming problems (see Section 10.1).
     However, the special structure of problem (10.11) can be exploited to design faster
     algorithms. In particular, it is quite natural to employ the iterative-improvement
idea as follows. We can always start with the zero flow (i.e., set xij = 0 for every
edge (i, j ) in the network). Then, on each iteration, we can try to find a path
from source to sink along which some additional flow can be sent. Such a path is
called flow augmenting. If a flow-augmenting path is found, we adjust the flow
along the edges of this path to get a flow of an increased value and try to find
an augmenting path for the new flow. If no flow-augmenting path can be found,
we conclude that the current flow is optimal. This general template for solving
the maximum-flow problem is called the augmenting-path method, also known
as the Ford-Fulkerson method after L. R. Ford, Jr., and D. R. Fulkerson, who
discovered it (see [For57]).
     An actual implementation of the augmenting path idea is, however, not quite
straightforward. To see this, let us consider the network in Figure 10.4. We start
with the zero flow shown in Figure 10.5a. (In that figure, the zero amounts sent
through each edge are separated from the edge capacities by the slashes; we will
use this notation in the other examples as well.) It is natural to search for a flow-
augmenting path from source to sink by following directed edges (i, j ) for which
the current flow xij is less than the edge capacity uij . Among several possibilities,
let us assume that we identify the augmenting path 1236 first. We can
increase the flow along this path by a maximum of 2 units, which is the smallest
unused capacity of its edges. The new flow is shown in Figure 10.5b. This is as far
as our simpleminded idea about flow-augmenting paths will be able to take us.
Unfortunately, the flow shown in Figure 10.5b is not optimal: its value can still
be increased along the path 143256 by increasing the flow by 1 on
edges (1, 4), (4, 3), (2, 5), and (5, 6) and decreasing it by 1 on edge (2, 3). The flow
obtained as the result of this augmentation is shown in Figure 10.5c. It is indeed
maximal. (Can you tell why?)
     Thus, to find a flow-augmenting path for a flow x, we need to consider paths
from source to sink in the underlying undirected graph in which any two consec-
utive vertices i, j are either
i.   connected by a directed edge from i to j with some positive unused capacity
     rij = uij - xij (so that we can increase the flow through that edge by up to rij
     units), or
ii.  connected by a directed edge from j to i with some positive flow xji (so that
     we can decrease the flow through that edge by up to xji units).
Edges of the first kind are called forward edges because their tail is listed before
their head in the vertex list 1  . . . i  j . . .  n defining the path; edges of the
second kind are called backward edges because their tail is listed after their head in
the path list 1  . . . i  j . . .  n. To illustrate, for the path 143256
of the last example, (1, 4), (4, 3), (2, 5), and (5, 6) are the forward edges, and (3, 2)
is the backward edge.
     For a given flow-augmenting path, let r be the minimum of all the unused
capacities rij of its forward edges and all the flows xji of its backward edges.
It is easy to see that if we increase the current flow by r on each forward edge
and decrease it by this amount on each backward edge, we will obtain a feasible
                                                   5
                                    0/3                         0/4
                  1         0/2  2            0/5  3            0/2      6
                     0/3                      0/1
                                 4
                                              (a)
                                                   5
                                    0/3                         0/4
                  1         2/2  2            2/5  3            2/2      6
                     0/3                      0/1
                                 4
                                              (b)
                                                   5
                                    1/3                         1/4
                  1         2/2  2            1/5  3            2/2      6
                     1/3                      1/1
                                 4
                                              (c)
     FIGURE 10.5  Illustration of the augmenting-path method. Flow-augmenting paths are
                  shown in bold. The flow amounts and edge capacities are indicated by
                  the numbers before and after the slash, respectively.
     flow whose value is r units greater than the value of its predecessor. Indeed, let
     i be an intermediate vertex on a flow-augmenting path. There are four possible
     combinations of forward and backward edges incident to vertex i:
     -+r i -+r ,                 -+r i --r ,       --r i -+r ,       --r i --r .
    For each of them, the flow-conservation requirement for vertex i will still hold
    after the flow adjustments indicated above the edge arrows. Further, since r is the
    minimum among all the positive unused capacities on the forward edges and all
    the positive flows on the backward edges of the flow-augmenting path, the new
    flow will satisfy the capacity constraints as well. Finally, adding r to the flow on
    the first edge of the augmenting path will increase the value of the flow by r.
    Under the assumption that all the edge capacities are integers, r will be a
    positive integer too. Hence, the flow value increases at least by 1 on each iteration
    of the augmenting-path method. Since the value of a maximum flow is bounded
    above (e.g., by the sum of the capacities of the source edges), the augmenting-path
    method has to stop after a finite number of iterations.4 Surprisingly, the final flow
    always turns out to be maximal, irrespective of a sequence of augmenting paths.
    This remarkable result stems from the proof of the Max-Flow Min-Cut Theorem
    (see, e.g., [For62]), which we replicate later in this section.
    The augmenting-path method--as described above in its general form--does
    not indicate a specific way for generating flow-augmenting paths. A bad sequence
    of such paths may, however, have a dramatic impact on the method's efficiency.
    Consider, for example, the network in Figure 10.6a, in which U stands for some
    large positive integer. If we augment the zero flow along the path 1234,
    we shall obtain the flow of value 1 shown in Figure 10.6b. Augmenting that flow
    along the path 1324 will increase the flow value to 2 (Figure 10.6c). If we
    continue selecting this pair of flow-augmenting paths, we will need a total of 2U
    iterations to reach the maximum flow of value 2U (Figure 10.6d). Of course, we
    can obtain the maximum flow in just two iterations by augmenting the initial zero
    flow along the path 124 followed by augmenting the new flow along the path
    134. The dramatic difference between 2U and 2 iterations makes the point.
    Fortunately, there are several ways to generate flow-augmenting paths ef-
    ficiently and avoid the degradation in performance illustrated by the previous
    example. The simplest of them uses breadth-first search to generate augment-
    ing paths with the least number of edges (see Section 3.5). This version of the
    augmenting-path method, called shortest-augmenting-path or first-labeled-first-
    scanned algorithm, was suggested by J. Edmonds and R. M. Karp [Edm72]. The
    labeling refers to marking a new (unlabeled) vertex with two labels. The first label
    indicates the amount of additional flow that can be brought from the source to
    the vertex being labeled. The second label is the name of the vertex from which
    the vertex being labeled was reached. (It can be left undefined for the source.) It
    is also convenient to add the + or - sign to the second label to indicate whether
    the vertex was reached via a forward or backward edge, respectively. The source
    can be always labeled with , -. For the other vertices, the labels are computed
    as follows.
4.  If capacity upper bounds are irrational numbers, the augmenting-path method may not terminate
    (see, e.g., [Chv83, pp. 387­388], for a cleverly devised example demonstrating such a situation). This
    limitation is only of theoretical interest because we cannot store irrational numbers in a computer, and
    rational numbers can be transformed into integers by changing the capacity measurement unit.
                                  2                               2
                      0/U                 0/U          1/U                  0/U
                      1              0/1       4       1             1/1         4
                      0/U                 0/U          0/U                  1/U
                                  3                               3
                                  (a)                             (b)
                                  2                               2
                      1/U                 1/U          U/U                  U/U
                      1              0/1       4       1             0/1         4
                      1/U                 1/U          U/U                  U/U
                                  3                               3
                                  (c)                             (d)
     FIGURE     10.6  Efficiency  degradation of  the  augmenting-path method.
     If unlabeled vertex j is connected to the front vertex i of the traversal queue
     by a directed edge from i to j with positive unused capacity rij = uij - xij , then
     vertex j is labeled with lj , i+, where lj = min{li, rij }.
     If unlabeled vertex j is connected to the front vertex i of the traversal queue
     by a directed edge from j to i with positive flow xji, then vertex j is labeled with
     lj , i-, where lj = min{li, xji}.
     If this labeling-enhanced traversal ends up labeling the sink, the current
     flow can be augmented by the amount indicated by the sink's first label. The
     augmentation is performed along the augmenting path traced by following the
     vertex second labels from sink to source: the current flow quantities are increased
     on the forward edges and decreased on the backward edges of this path. If, on the
     other hand, the sink remains unlabeled after the traversal queue becomes empty,
     the algorithm returns the current flow as maximum and stops.
     ALGORITHM        ShortestAugmentingPath(G)
     //Implements the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm
     //Input: A network with single source 1, single sink n, and
     //               positive integer capacities uij on its edges (i, j )
     //Output: A maximum flow x
     assign xij = 0 to every edge (i, j ) in the network
     label the source with , - and add the source to the empty queue Q
while not Empty(Q) do
i  Front(Q);               Dequeue(Q)
for every edge from i to j do           //forward edges
              if j is unlabeled
              rij  uij - xij
              if rij > 0
                    lj  min{li, rij };  label j with lj , i+
                    Enqueue(Q, j )
for every edge from j to i do           //backward edges
              if j is unlabeled
              if xji > 0
                    lj  min{li, xji};   label j with lj , i-
                    Enqueue(Q, j )
if the sink has been labeled
              //augment along the augmenting path found
              j n   //start at the sink and move backwards using second      labels
              while j = 1  //the source hasn't been reached
              if the second label of vertex j is i+
                    xij  xij + ln
              else       //the second label of vertex j is i-
                    xji  xji - ln
              j  i;        i  the vertex indicated by i's second label
              erase all vertex labels except the ones of the source
              reinitialize Q with the source
return x //the current flow is maximum
An application of this algorithm to the network in Figure 10.4 is illustrated in
Figure 10.7.
The optimality of a final flow obtained by the augmenting-path method stems
from a theorem that relates network flows to network cuts. A cut induced by
partitioning vertices of a network into some subset X containing the source and
X¯ , the complement of X, containing the sink is the set of all the edges with a tail
in X and a head in X¯ . We denote a cut C(X, X¯ ) or simply C. For example, for the
network in Figure 10.4:
if X = {1} and hence X¯ = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6},    C(X, X¯ ) = {(1, 2), (1, 4)};
if X = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and hence X¯ = {6},    C(X, X¯ ) = {(3, 6), (5, 6)};
if X = {1, 2, 4} and hence X¯ = {3, 5, 6},    C(X, X¯ ) = {(2, 3), (2, 5), (4, 3)}.
The name "cut" stems from the following property: if all the edges of a cut
were deleted from the network, there would be no directed path from source to
sink. Indeed, let C(X, X¯ ) be a cut. Consider a directed path from source to sink. If
vi is the first vertex of that path which belongs to X¯ (the set of such vertices is not
                                                                                      2, 2+
                                  5                                                   5
             0/3                           0/4                              0/3                    0/4
     0/2          0/5                      0/2                  0/2  2, 1+  0/ 5                   0/ 2
1         2                       3                 6  ,  ­  1       2                3                         6  2,  3+
                                                                                      2, 2+
     0/3               0/1                                      0/3              0/1
          4                                                          4
                                                                     3, 1+
          Queue:  1    2    4  3     5  6                       Augment the flow by 2 (the sink's first label)
                                                                     along the path 1  2  3  6.
                                                                                      1, 2+
                                  5                                                   5
             0/3                           0/4                              0/3                    0/4
     2/2          2/5                      2/2                  2/2  1, 3­  2/5                    2/2
1         2                       3                 6  ,  ­  1       2                3                         6  1,  5+
                                                                                      1, 4+
     0/3               0/1                                      0/3              0/1
          4                                                          4
          Queue:  1    4    3  2     5  6                            3, 1+
                                                                Augment the flow by 1 (the sink's first label)
                                                                along the path 1  4  3  2  5  6.
                                  5                                                   5
                  1/3                      1/4                              1/3                    1/4
1    2/2  2       1/5             3        2/2      6  , ­   1  2/2  2      1/5       3            2/2          6
     1/3               1/1                                      1/3              1/1
          4                                                          4
                                                                     2, 1+
          Queue:     14                                         No augmenting path (the sink is unlabeled);
                                                                     the current flow is maximal.
                  FIGURE 10.7              Illustration of the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm. The diagrams on
                                           the left show the current flow before the next iteration begins; the
                                           diagrams on the right show the results of the vertex labeling on that
                                           iteration, the augmenting path found (in bold), and the flow before its
                                           augmentation. Vertices deleted from the queue are indicated by the 
                                           symbol.
empty, because it contains the sink), then vi is not the source and its immediate
predecessor vi-1 on that path belongs to X. Hence, the edge from vi-1 to vi must
be an element of the cut C(X, X¯ ). This proves the property in question.
       The capacity of a cut C(X, X¯ ), denoted c(X, X¯ ), is defined as the sum of
capacities of the edges that compose the cut. For the three examples of cuts given
above, the capacities are equal to 5, 6, and 9, respectively. Since the number of
different cuts in a network is nonempty and finite (why?), there always exists
a minimum cut, i.e., a cut with the smallest capacity. (What is a minimum cut
in the network of Figure 10.4?) The following theorem establishes an important
relationship between the notions of maximum flow and minimum cut.
THEOREM (Max-Flow Min-Cut Theorem)             The value of a maximum flow in a
network is equal to the capacity of its minimum cut.
PROOF  First, let x be a feasible flow of value v and let C(X, X¯ ) be a cut of
capacity c in the same network. Consider the flow across this cut defined as the
difference between the sum of the flows on the edges from X to X¯ and the sum
of the flows on the edges from X¯ to X. It is intuitively clear and can be formally
derived from the equations expressing the flow-conservation requirement and the
definition of the flow value (Problem 6b in this section's exercises) that the flow
across the cut C(X, X¯ ) is equal to v, the value of the flow:
                          v=            xij -             xj i .           (10.12)
                              iX, j X¯         j X¯ , iX
Since the second sum is nonnegative and the flow xij on any edge (i, j ) cannot
exceed the edge capacity uij , equality (10.12) implies that
                          v             xij               uij ,
                              iX, j X¯         iX, j X¯
i.e.,
                                        v  c.                              (10.13)
Thus, the value of any feasible flow in a network cannot exceed the capacity of
any cut in that network.
       Let v be the value of a final flow x obtained by the augmenting-path method.
If we now find a cut whose capacity is equal to v, we will have to conclude, in view
of inequality (10.13), that (i) the value v of the final flow is maximal among all
feasible flows, (ii) the cut's capacity is minimal among all cuts in the network, and
(iii) the maximum-flow value is equal to the minimum-cut capacity.
       To find such a cut, consider the set of vertices X that can be reached from the
source by following an undirected path composed of forward edges with positive
unused capacities (with respect to the final flow x) and backward edges with
positive flows on them. This set contains the source but does not contain the
sink: if it did, we would have an augmenting path for the flow x, which would
     contradict the assumption that the flow x is final. Consider the cut C(X, X). By
     the definition of set X, each edge (i, j ) from X to X has zero unused capacity,
     i.e., xij = uij , and each edge (j, i) from X to X has the zero flow on it (otherwise,
     j would be in X). Applying equality (10.12) to the final flow x and the set X
     defined above, we obtain
     v =                    xij -           xji =           uij - 0 = c(X, X),
                   iX, j X         j X, iX         iX, j X
     which proves the theorem.
     The proof outlined above accomplishes more than proving the equality of the
     maximum-flow value and the minimum-cut capacity. It also implies that when the
     augmenting-path method terminates, it yields both a maximum flow and a mini-
     mum cut. If labeling of the kind utilized in the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm
     is used, a minimum cut is formed by the edges from the labeled to unlabeled ver-
     tices on the last iteration of the method. Finally, the proof implies that all such
     edges must be full (i.e., the flows must be equal to the edge capacities), and all
     the edges from unlabeled vertices to labeled, if any, must be empty (i.e., have
     zero flows on them). In particular, for the network in Figure 10.7, the algorithm
     finds the cut {(1, 2), (4, 3)} of minimum capacity 3, both edges of which are full as
     required.
     Edmonds and Karp proved in their paper [Edm72] that the number of aug-
     menting paths needed by the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm never exceeds
     nm/2, where n and m are the number of vertices and edges, respectively. Since
     the time required to find a shortest augmenting path by breadth-first search is
     in O(n + m) = O(m) for networks represented by their adjacency lists, the time
     efficiency of the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm is in O(nm2).
     More efficient algorithms for the maximum-flow problem are known (see the
     monograph [Ahu93], as well as appropriate chapters in such books as [Cor09] and
     [Kle06]). Some of them implement the augmenting-path idea in a more efficient
     manner. Others are based on the concept of preflows. A preflow is a flow that
     satisfies the capacity constraints but not the flow-conservation requirement. Any
     vertex is allowed to have more flow entering the vertex than leaving it. A preflow-
     push algorithm moves the excess flow toward the sink until the flow-conservation
     requirement is reestablished for all intermediate vertices of the network. Faster al-
     gorithms of this kind have worst-case efficiency close to O(nm). Note that preflow-
     push algorithms fall outside the iterative-improvement paradigm because they do
     not generate a sequence of improving solutions that satisfy all the constraints of
     the problem.
     To conclude this section, it is worth pointing out that although the initial
     interest in studying network flows was caused by transportation applications, this
     model has also proved to be useful for many other areas. We discuss one of them
     in the next section.
Exercises 10.2
1.  Since maximum-flow algorithms require processing edges in both directions,
    it is convenient to modify the adjacency matrix representation of a network
    as follows. If there is a directed edge from vertex i to vertex j of capacity
    uij , then the element in the ith row and the j th column is set to uij , and the
    element in the j th row and the ith column is set to -uij ; if there is no edge
    between vertices i and j , both these elements are set to zero. Outline a simple
    algorithm for identifying a source and a sink in a network presented by such
    a matrix and indicate its time efficiency.
2.  Apply the shortest-augmenting path algorithm to find a maximum flow and a
    minimum cut in the following networks.
    a.                                   5               2
                                      1            2           5
                                6               4           4
                                      3  7         4     8     6
    b.                                             3
                                         2               4
                                2                                1
                           1                4         4              6
                                7        3               5       5
                                                   2
3.  a.  Does the maximum-flow problem always have a unique solution? Would
        your answer be different for networks with different capacities on all their
        edges?
    b.  Answer the same questions for the minimum-cut problem of finding a cut
        of the smallest capacity in a given network.
4.  a.  Explain  how  the  maximum-flow         problem     for   a  network  with  several
        sources and sinks can be transformed into the same problem for a network
        with a single source and a single sink.
    b.  Some networks have capacity constraints on the flow amounts that can
        flow through their intermediate vertices. Explain how the maximum-flow
        problem for such a network can be transformed to the maximum-flow
        problem for a network with edge capacity constraints only.
5.  Consider a network that is a rooted tree, with the root as its source, the leaves
    as its sinks, and all the edges directed along the paths from the root to the
    leaves. Design an efficient algorithm for finding a maximum flow in such a
    network. What is the time efficiency of your algorithm?
6.  a.  Prove equality (10.9).
                b.   Prove that for any flow in a network and any cut in it, the value of            the
                     flow is equal to the flow across the cut (see equality (10.12)). Explain        the
                     relationship between this property and equality (10.9).
           7.   a.   Express the maximum-flow problem for the network in Figure 10.4 as a
                     linear programming problem.
                b. Solve this linear programming problem by the simplex method.
           8.   As an alternative to the shortest-augmenting-path algorithm, Edmonds and
                Karp [Edm72] suggested the maximum-capacity-augmenting-path algorithm,
                in which a flow is augmented along the path that increases the flow by the
                largest amount. Implement both these algorithms in the language of your
                choice and perform an empirical investigation of their relative efficiency.
           9.   Write  a  report  on  a    more  advanced    maximum-flow         algorithm  such    as
                (i)  Dinitz's  algorithm,  (ii)  Karzanov's  algorithm,    (iii)  Malhotra-Kamar-
                Maheshwari algorithm, or (iv) Goldberg-Tarjan algorithm.
           10.  Dining problem    Several families go out to dinner together. To increase their
                social interaction, they would like to sit at tables so that no two members of
                the same family are at the same table. Show how to find a seating arrangement
                that meets this objective (or prove that no such arrangement exists) by using
                a maximum-flow problem. Assume that the dinner contingent has p families
                and that the ith family has ai members. Also assume that q tables are available
                and the j th table has a seating capacity of bj . [Ahu93]
     