Maximum Matching in Bipartite Graphs
In many situations we are faced with a problem of pairing elements of two sets.
           The traditional example is boys and girls for a dance, but you can easily think
           of more serious applications. It is convenient to represent elements of two given
           sets by vertices of a graph, with edges between vertices that can be paired. A
           matching in a graph is a subset of its edges with the property that no two edges
           share a vertex. A maximum matching--more precisely, a maximum cardinality
           matching--is a matching with the largest number of edges. (What is it for the graph
           in Figure 10.8? Is it unique?) The maximum-matching problem is the problem of
           finding a maximum matching in a given graph. For an arbitrary graph, this is a
           rather difficult problem. It was solved in 1965 by Jack Edmonds [Edm65]. (See
           [Gal86] for a good survey and more recent references.)
                We limit our discussion in this section to the simpler case of bipartite graphs. In
           a bipartite graph, all the vertices can be partitioned into two disjoint sets V and U ,
           not necessarily of the same size, so that every edge connects a vertex in one of these
           sets to a vertex in the other set. In other words, a graph is bipartite if its vertices
           can be colored in two colors so that every edge has its vertices colored in different
           colors; such graphs are also said to be 2-colorable. The graph in Figure 10.8 is
           bipartite. It is not difficult to prove that a graph is bipartite if and only if it does
           not have a cycle of an odd length. We will assume for the rest of this section that
                    V     1  2                   3  4
                    U     5  6                   7  8
FIGURE 10.8  Example of a bipartite graph.
the vertex set of a given bipartite graph has been already partitioned into sets V
and U as required by the definition (see Problem 8 in Exercises 3.5).
Let  us      apply  the   iterative-improvement     technique   to     the    maximum-
cardinality-matching problem. Let M be a matching in a bipartite graph G =
V , U, E . How can we improve it, i.e., find a new matching with more edges?
Obviously, if every vertex in either V or U is matched (has a mate), i.e., serves as
an endpoint of an edge in M, this cannot be done and M is a maximum matching.
Therefore, to have a chance at improving the current matching,         both V and U
must contain unmatched (also called free) vertices, i.e., vertices that are not inci-
dent to any edge in M. For example, for the matching Ma = {(4, 8), (5, 9)} in the
graph in Figure 10.9a, vertices 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 10 are free, and vertices 4, 5, 8,
and 9 are matched.
Another obvious observation is that we can immediately increase a current
matching by adding an edge between two free vertices. For example, adding (1, 6)
to the matching Ma = {(4, 8), (5, 9)} in the graph in Figure 10.9a yields a larger
matching Mb = {(1, 6), (4, 8), (5, 9)} (Figure 10.9b). Let us now try to find a
matching larger than Mb by matching vertex 2. The only way to do this would
be to include the edge (2, 6) in a new matching. This inclusion requires removal of
(1, 6), which can be compensated by inclusion of (1, 7) in the new matching. This
new matching Mc = {(1, 7), (2, 6), (4, 8), (5, 9)} is shown in Figure 10.9c.
In general, we increase the size of a current matching M by constructing a
simple path from a free vertex in V to a free vertex in U whose edges are alternately
in E - M and in M. That is, the first edge of the path does not belong to M, the
second one does, and so on, until the last edge that does not belong to M. Such a
path is called augmenting with respect to the matching M. For example, the path
2, 6, 1, 7 is an augmenting path with respect to the matching Mb in Figure 10.9b.
Since the length of an augmenting path is always odd, adding to the matching M
the path's edges in the odd-numbered positions and deleting from it the path's
edges in the even-numbered positions yields a matching with one more edge than
in M. Such a matching adjustment is called augmentation. Thus, in Figure 10.9,
the matching Mb was obtained by augmentation of the matching Ma along the
augmenting path 1, 6, and the matching Mc was obtained by augmentation of the
matching Mb along the augmenting path 2, 6, 1, 7. Moving further, 3, 8, 4, 9, 5, 10
is an augmenting path for the matching Mc (Figure 10.9c). After adding to Mc
the edges (3, 8), (4, 9), and (5, 10) and deleting (4, 8) and (5, 9), we obtain the
matching Md = {(1, 7), (2, 6), (3, 8), (4, 9), (5, 10)} shown in Figure 10.9d. The
                  V     1      2              3       4                 5
                  U     6      7              8       9                10
                                              (a)
                               Augmenting path:    1, 6
                     1      2     3                4                5
                     6      7     8                9                10
                                  (b)
                            Augmenting path:       2, 6, 1, 7
                     1      2     3                4                5
                     6      7     8                9                10
                                  (c)
                            Augmenting path:     3, 8, 4, 9, 5, 10
                     1      2     3                4                5
                     6      7     8                9                10
                                  (d)
                               Maximum matching
     FIGURE 10.9  Augmenting paths and matching augmentations.
matching Md is not only a maximum matching but also perfect, i.e., a matching
that matches all the vertices of the graph.
Before we discuss an algorithm for finding an augmenting path, let us settle
the issue of what nonexistence of such a path means. According to the theorem
discovered by the French mathematician Claude Berge, it means the current
matching is maximal.
THEOREM  A matching M is a maximum matching if and only if there exists no
augmenting path with respect to M.
PROOF  If an augmenting path with respect to a matching M exists, then the size
of the matching can be increased by augmentation. Let us prove the more difficult
part: if no augmenting path with respect to a matching M exists, then the matching
is a maximum matching. Assume that, on the contrary, this is not the case for a
certain matching M in a graph G. Let M be a maximum matching in G; by our
assumption, the number of edges in M is at least one more than the number
of edges in M, i.e., |M| > |M|. Consider the edges in the symmetric difference
M  M = (M - M)  (M - M), the set of all the edges that are either in M or
in M but not in both. Note that |M - M| > |M - M| because |M| > |M| by
assumption. Let G be the subgraph of G made up of all the edges in M  M and
their endpoints. By definition of a matching, any vertex in G  G can be incident
to no more than one edge in M and no more than one edge in M. Hence, each of
the vertices in G has degree 2 or less, and therefore every connected component
of G is either a path or an even-length cycle of alternating edges from M - M and
M - M. Since |M - M| > |M - M| and the number of edges from M - M and
M - M is the same for any even-length cycle of alternating edges in G , there must
exist at least one path of alternating edges that starts and ends with an edge from
M - M. Hence, this is an augmenting path for the matching M, which contradicts
the assumption that no such path exists.
Our discussion of augmenting paths leads to the following general method
for constructing a maximum matching in a bipartite graph. Start with some initial
matching (e.g., the empty set). Find an augmenting path and augment the current
matching along this path. When no augmenting path can be found, terminate the
algorithm and return the last matching, which is maximum.
We now give a specific algorithm implementing this general template. We will
search for an augmenting path for a matching M by a BFS-like traversal of the
graph that starts simultaneously at all the free vertices in one of the sets V and U,
say, V . (It would be logical to select the smaller of the two vertex sets, but we will
ignore this observation in the pseudocode below.) Recall that an augmenting path,
if it exists, is an odd-length path that connects a free vertex in V with a free vertex
in U and which, unless it consists of a single edge, "zigs" from a vertex in V to
another vertex' mate in U , then "zags" back to V along the uniquely defined edge
from M, and so on until a free vertex in U is reached. (Draw augmenting paths
for the matchings in Figure 10.9, for example.) Hence, any candidate to be such a
     path must have its edges alternate in the pattern just described. This motivates the
     following rules for labeling vertices during the BFS-like traversal of the graph.
     Case 1 (the queue's front vertex w is in V )          If u is a free vertex adjacent to
     w, it is used as the other endpoint of an augmenting path; so the labeling stops
     and augmentation of the matching commences. The augmenting path in question
     is obtained by moving backward along the vertex labels (see below) to alternately
     add and delete its edges to and from the current matching. If u is not free and
     connected to w by an edge not in M, label u with w unless it has been already
     labeled.
     Case 2 (the front vertex w is in U )            In this case, w must be matched and we
     label its mate in V with w.
     Here is pseudocode of the algorithm in its entirety.
     ALGORITHM          MaximumBipartiteMatching(G)
     //Finds a maximum matching in a bipartite graph by a BFS-like traversal
     //Input: A bipartite graph G =      V, U, E
     //Output: A maximum-cardinality matching M in the input graph
     initialize set M of edges with some valid matching (e.g., the empty set)
     initialize queue Q with all the free vertices in V (in any order)
     while not Empty(Q) do
               w  Front(Q);       Dequeue(Q)
               if w  V
                     for every vertex u adjacent to w do
                        if u is free
                              //augment
                              M  M  (w, u)
                              vw
                              while v is labeled do
                                  u  vertex indicated by v's label;       M  M - (v, u)
                                  v  vertex indicated by u's label;       M  M  (v, u)
                              remove all vertex labels
                              reinitialize Q with all free vertices in V
                              break   //exit the for loop
                        else  //u is matched
                              if (w, u)  M and u is unlabeled
                                  label u with w
                                  Enqueue(Q, u)
               else  //w  U (and matched)
                     label the mate v of w with w
                     Enqueue(Q, v)
     return M           //current matching is maximum
         An application of this algorithm to the matching in Figure 10.9a is shown in
Figure 10.10. Note that the algorithm finds a maximum matching that differs from
the one in Figure 10.9d.
V     1     2           3              4         5        1        2             3              4      5
U     6     7           8              9        10        6        7             8              9     10
                Queue:     1  2  3                        1
                                                                      Queue:        1  2  3
                                                                                    
                                                                      Augment from 6
                                                       6                                     8
   1     2      3                   4        5         1        2             3              4     5
   6     7      8                   9        10        6        7             8              9     10
                Queue:     2  3                        2        1             3
                                                                Queue:     2  3     6  8  1  4
                                                                                          
                                                                      Augment from 7
                                                                6                            8
   1     2      3                   4        5         1        2             3              4     5
   6     7      8                   9        10        6        7             8              9     10
                Queue: 3                               3                      3              4     4
                                                                Queue:     3  6     8  2  4  9
                                                                                          
                                                                      Augment from 10
                           1              2         3        4          5
                           6              7         8        9        10
                                 Queue:      empty  maximum matching
FIGURE   10.10  Application of the maximum-cardinality-matching algorithm. The left
                column shows a current matching and initialized queue at the next
                iteration's start; the right column shows the vertex labeling generated
                by the algorithm before augmentation is performed. Matching edges are
                shown in bold. Vertex labels indicate the vertices from which the labeling
                is done. The discovered endpoint of an augmenting path is shaded and
                labeled for clarity. Vertices deleted from the queue are indicated by .
         How efficient is the maximum-matching algorithm? Each iteration except
     the last one matches two previously free vertices--one from each of the sets V
     and U. Therefore, the total number of iterations cannot exceed  n/2     + 1, where
     n = |V | + |U | is the number of vertices in the graph. The time spent on each
     iteration is in O(n + m), where m = |E| is the number of edges in the graph. (This
     assumes that the information about the status of each vertex--free or matched and
     the vertex' mate if the latter--can be retrieved in constant time, e.g., by storing it in
     an array.) Hence, the time efficiency of the algorithm is in O(n(n + m)). Hopcroft
     and Karp [Hop73] showed how the efficiency can be improved to O(        n(n + m))
     by combining several iterations into a single stage to maximize the number of
     edges added to the matching with one search.
         We were concerned in this section with matching the largest possible number
     of vertex pairs in a bipartite graph. Some applications may require taking into ac-
     count the quality or cost of matching different pairs. For example, workers may
     execute jobs with different efficiencies, or girls may have different preferences for
     their potential dance partners. It is natural to model such situations by bipartite
     graphs with weights assigned to their edges. This leads to the problem of maxi-
     mizing the sum of the weights on edges connecting matched pairs of vertices. This
     problem is called maximum-weight matching. We encountered it under a differ-
     ent name--the assignment problem--in Section 3.4. There are several sophisti-
     cated algorithms for this problem, which are much more efficient than exhaustive
     search (see, e.g., [Pap82], [Gal86], [Ahu93]). We have to leave them outside of our
     discussion, however, because of their complexity, especially for general graphs.
     Exercises 10.3
     1.  For each matching shown below in bold, find an augmentation or explain why
         no augmentation exists.
         a.                                        b.
         1      2              3     4             1      2               3                     4
             5              6     7                5      6               7                     8
     2.  Apply the maximum-matching algorithm to the following bipartite graph:
                                  1     2              3
                                  4     5              6
3.  a.  What is the largest and what is the smallest possible cardinality of a match-
        ing in a bipartite graph G =   V, U, E       with n vertices in each vertex set V
        and U and at least n edges?
    b.  What is the largest and what is the smallest number of distinct solutions
        the maximum-cardinality-matching problem can have for a bipartite graph
        G=     V, U, E  with n vertices in each vertex set V and U and at least n
        edges?
4.  a.  Hall's Marriage Theorem asserts that a bipartite graph G =             V, U, E  has a
        matching that matches all vertices of the set V if and only if for each subset
        S  V , |R(S)|  |S| where R(S) is the set of all vertices adjacent to a vertex
        in S. Check this property for the following graph with (i) V = {1, 2, 3, 4}
        and (ii) V = {5, 6, 7}.
                                 1           2       3           4
                                    5           6             7
    b.  You have to devise an algorithm that returns yes if there is a matching in
        a bipartite graph G =       V, U, E     that matches all vertices in V and returns
        no otherwise. Would you base your algorithm on checking the condition
        of Hall's Marriage Theorem?
5.  Suppose there are five committees A, B, C, D, and E composed of six persons
    a, b, c, d, e, and f as follows: committee A's members are b and e; committee
    B's members are b, d, and e; committee C's members are a, c, d, e, and f ;
    committee D's members are b, d, and e; committee E's members are b and
    e. Is there a system of distinct representatives, i.e., is it possible to select
    a representative from each committee so that all the selected persons are
    distinct?
6.  Show how the maximum-cardinality-matching problem for a bipartite graph
    can be reduced to the maximum-flow problem discussed in Section 10.2.
7.  Consider the following greedy algorithm for finding a maximum matching
    in  a bipartite graph  G=       V , U, E . Sort  all the     vertices  in  nondecreasing
    order of their degrees. Scan this sorted list to add to the current matching
    (initially empty) the edge from the list's free vertex to an adjacent free vertex
    of the lowest degree. If the list's vertex is matched or if there are no adjacent
    free vertices for it, the vertex is simply skipped. Does this algorithm always
    produce a maximum matching in a bipartite graph?
8.  Design a linear-time algorithm for finding a maximum matching in a tree.
9.  Implement the maximum-matching algorithm of this section in the language
    of your choice. Experiment with its performance on bipartite graphs with n
    vertices in each of the vertex sets and randomly generated edges (in both
                 dense and sparse modes) to compare the observed running time with the
                 algorithm's theoretical efficiency.
           10.   Domino puzzle     A domino is a 2 × 1 tile that can be oriented either hori-
                 zontally or vertically. A tiling of a given board composed of 1 × 1 squares is
                 covering it with dominoes exactly and without overlap. Is it possible to tile with
                 dominoes an 8 × 8 board without two unit squares at its diagonally opposite
                 corners?
     