In this section, we discuss several algorithms for solving nonlinear equations in
      one unknown,
                                f (x) = 0.                                  (12.4)
      There are several reasons for this choice among subareas of numerical analysis.
      First of all, this is an extremely important problem from both a practical and the-
      oretical point of view. It arises as a mathematical model of numerous phenomena
      in the sciences and engineering, both directly and indirectly. (Recall, for example,
      that the standard calculus technique for finding extremum points of a function
      f (x) is based on finding its critical points, which are the roots of the equation
      f (x) = 0.) Second, it represents the most accessible topic in numerical analysis
      and, at the same time, exhibits its typical tools and concerns. Third, some meth-
      ods for solving equations closely parallel algorithms for array searching and hence
      provide examples of applying general algorithm design techniques to problems of
      continuous mathematics.
           Let us start with dispelling a misconception you might have about solving
      equations. Your experience with equation solving from middle school to calculus
      courses might have led you to believe that we can solve equations by "factoring"
      or by applying a readily available formula. Sorry to break it to you, but you have
      been deceived (with the best of educational intentions, of course): you were able
      to solve all those equations only because they had been carefully selected to make
      it possible. In general, we cannot solve equations exactly and need approximation
      algorithms to do so.
           This is true even for solving the quadratic equation
                                ax2 + bx + c = 0
      because the standard formula for its roots
                                x1,2 = -b ±       b2 - 4ac
                                                  2a
      requires computing the square root, which can be done only approximately for
      most positive numbers. In addition, as we discussed in Section 11.4, this canonical
      formula needs to be modified to avoid the possibility of low-accuracy solutions.
         What about formulas for roots of polynomials of degrees higher than two?
         Such formulas for third- and fourth-degree polynomials exist, but they are too
         cumbersome to be of practical value. For polynomials of degrees higher than
         four, there can be no general formula for their roots that would involve only the
         polynomial's coefficients, arithmetical operations, and radicals (taking roots). This
         remarkable result was published first by the Italian mathematician and physician
         Paolo Ruffini (1765­1822) in 1799 and rediscovered a quarter century later by the
         Norwegian mathematician Niels Abel (1802­1829); it was developed further by
         the French mathematician Evariste Galois (1811­1832).4
         The impossibility of such a formula can hardly be considered a great disap-
         pointment. As the great German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777­1855)
         put it in his thesis of 1801, the algebraic solution of an equation was no better than
         devising a symbol for the root of the equation and then saying that the equation
         had a root equal to the symbol [OCo98].
         We can interpret solutions to equation (12.4) as points at which the graph
         of the function f (x) intersects with the x-axis. The three algorithms we discuss
         in this section take advantage of this interpretation. Of course, the graph of f (x)
         may intersect the x-axis at a single point (e.g., x3 = 0), at multiple or even infinitely
         many points (sin x = 0), or at no point (ex + 1 = 0). Equation (12.4) would then
         have a single root, several roots, and no roots, respectively. It is a good idea to
         sketch a graph of the function before starting to approximate its roots. It can help
         to determine the number of roots and their approximate locations. In general, it
         is a good idea to isolate roots, i.e., to identify intervals containing a single root of
         the equation in question.
