newton's method also called the newton raphson method is one of the most important general algorithms for solving equations. when applied to equation . in one unknown it can be illustrated by figure . the next element xn of the method's approximation sequence is obtained as the x intercept of the tangent line to the graph of function f x at xn. the analytical formula for the elements of the approximation sequence turns out to be xn xn f xn for n . . . . . f xn an bn xn f xn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . figure . trace of the method of false position for equation . . the signs after the numbers in the second and third columns indicate the sign of f x x x at the corresponding endpoints of the intervals. f xn xn xn x figure . iteration of newton's method. in most cases newton's algorithm guarantees convergence of sequence . if an initial approximation x is chosen close enough to the root. precisely defined prescriptions for choosing x can be found in numerical analysis textbooks. it may converge for initial approximations far from the root as well but this is not always true. example computing a for a can be done by finding a nonnegative root of equation x a . if we use formula . for this case of f x x a and f x x we obtain xn xn f xn xn xn a xn a a xn f xn xn xn xn which is exactly the formula we used in section . for computing approximate values of square roots. example let us apply newton's method to equation . which we previously solved with the bisection method and the method of false position. formula . for this case becomes xn xn xn xn . xn as an initial element of the approximation sequence we take say x . figure . contains the results of the first five iterations of newton's method. you cannot fail to notice how much faster newton's approximation sequence converges to the root than the approximation sequences of both the bisection method and the method of false position. this very fast convergence is typical of newton's method if an initial approximation is close to the equation's root. note however that on each iteration of this method we need to evaluate new values of the function and its derivative whereas the previous two methods require only one new value of the function itself. also newton's method does not bracket a root as these two methods do. moreover for an arbitrary function and arbitrarily chosen initial approximation its approximation sequence may diverge. and because formula . has the function's derivative in the denominator the method may break down if it is equal to zero. in fact newton's method is most effective when f x is bounded away from zero near root x. in particular if f x m on the interval between xn and x we can estimate the distance between xn and x by using the mean value theorem of calculus as follows f xn f x f c xn x where c is some point between xn and x. since f x and f c m we obtain n xn xn f xn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . figure . trace of newton's method for equation . . xn x f xn . . m formula . can be used as a criterion for stopping newton's algorithm when its right hand side becomes smaller than a preselected accuracy level . other possible stopping criteria are xn xn and f xn where is a small positive number. since the last two criteria do not necessarily imply closeness of xn to root x they should be considered inferior to the one based on . . the shortcomings of newton's method should not overshadow its principal strengths fast convergence for an appropriately chosen initial approximation and applicability to much more general types of equations and systems of equations. 