before we leave this section let us summarize the main points of the framework outlined above. both time and space efficiencies are measured as functions of the algorithm's input size. time efficiency is measured by counting the number of times the algorithm's basic operation is executed. space efficiency is measured by counting the number of extra memory units consumed by the algorithm. the efficiencies of some algorithms may differ significantly for inputs of the same size. for such algorithms we need to distinguish between the worst case average case and best case efficiencies. the framework's primary interest lies in the order of growth of the algorithm's running time extra memory units consumed as its input size goes to infinity. in the next section we look at formal means to investigate orders of growth. in sections . and . we discuss particular methods for investigating nonrecursive and recursive algorithms respectively. it is there that you will see how the analysis framework outlined here can be applied to investigating the efficiency of specific algorithms. you will encounter many more examples throughout the rest of the book. exercises . . for each of the following algorithms indicate i a natural size metric for its inputs ii its basic operation and iii whether the basic operation count can be different for inputs of the same size a. computing the sum of n numbers b. computing n! c. finding the largest element in a list of n numbers d. euclid's algorithm e. sieve of eratosthenes f. pen and pencil algorithm for multiplying two n digit decimal integers . a. consider the definition based algorithm for adding two n n matrices. what is its basic operation? how many times is it performed as a function of the matrix order n? as a function of the total number of elements in the input matrices? b. answer the same questions for the definition based algorithm for matrix multiplication. . consider a variation of sequential search that scans a list to return the number of occurrences of a given search key in the list. does its efficiency differ from the efficiency of classic sequential search? . a. glove selection there are gloves in a drawer pairs of red gloves pairs of yellow and pairs of green. you select the gloves in the dark and can check them only after a selection has been made. what is the smallest number of gloves you need to select to have at least one matching pair in the best case? in the worst case? b. missing socks imagine that after washing distinct pairs of socks you discover that two socks are missing. of course you would like to have the largest number of complete pairs remaining. thus you are left with complete pairs in the best case scenario and with complete pairs in the worst case. assuming that the probability of disappearance for each of the socks is the same find the probability of the best case scenario the probability of the worst case scenario the number of pairs you should expect in the average case. . a. prove formula . for the number of bits in the binary representation of a positive decimal integer. b. prove the alternative formula for the number of bits in the binary representation of a positive integer n b log n . c. what would be the analogous formulas for the number of decimal digits? d. explain why within the accepted analysis framework it does not matter whether we use binary or decimal digits in measuring n's size. . suggest how any sorting algorithm can be augmented in a way to make the best case count of its key comparisons equal to just n n is a list's size of course . do you think it would be a worthwhile addition to any sorting algorithm? . gaussian elimination the classic algorithm for solving systems of n linear equations in n unknowns requires about n multiplications which is the algorithm's basic operation. a. how much longer should you expect gaussian elimination to work on a system of equations versus a system of equations? b. you are considering buying a computer that is times faster than the one you currently have. by what factor will the faster computer increase the sizes of systems solvable in the same amount of time as on the old computer? . for each of the following functions indicate how much the function's value will change if its argument is increased fourfold. a. log n b. n c. n d. n e. n f. n . for each of the following pairs of functions indicate whether the first function of each of the following pairs has a lower same or higher order of growth to within a constant multiple than the second function. a. n n and n b. n and . n c. log n and ln n d. log n and log n e. n and n f. n ! and n! . invention of chess a. according to a well known legend the game of chess was invented many centuries ago in northwestern india by a certain sage. when he took his invention to his king the king liked the game so much that he offered the inventor any reward he wanted. the inventor asked for some grain to be obtained as follows just a single grain of wheat was to be placed on the first square of the chessboard two on the second four on the third eight on the fourth and so on until all squares had been filled. if it took just second to count each grain how long would it take to count all the grain due to him? b. how long would it take if instead of doubling the number of grains for each square of the chessboard the inventor asked for adding two grains? 