http://www.nwlink.com/~donclark/hrd/bloom.html + Wiki

The committee identified three domains of educational activities or learning (Bloom, et al. 1956):
	Cognitive: mental skills (knowledge)
	Affective: growth in feelings or emotional areas (attitude or self)
	Psychomotor: manual or physical skills (skills)

KSA (Knowledge (cognitive), Skills (psychomotor), and Attitudes (affective)). This taxonomy of learning behaviors may be thought of as “the goals of the learning process.” That is, after a learning episode, the learner should have acquired a new skill, knowledge, and/or attitude.

There are six major categories of cognitive an processes, starting from the simplest to the most complex (see the table below for an in-depth coverage of each category):
	Knowledge
		involves the recall of specifics and universals, the recall of methods and processes, or the recall of a pattern, structure, or setting.
	Comprehension
		refers to a type of understanding or apprehension such that the individual knows what is being communicated and can make use of the material or idea being communicated without necessarily relating it to other material or seeing its fullest implications.
	Application refers to the
		use of abstractions in particular and concrete situations.
	Analysis represents the
		breakdown of a communication into its constituent elements or parts such that the relative hierarchy of ideas is made clear and/or the relations between ideas expressed are made explicit.
	Synthesis involves the
		putting together of elements and parts so as to form a whole.
	Evaluation engenders
		judgments about the value of material and methods for given purposes.

The categories can be thought of as degrees of difficulties. That is, the first ones must normally be mastered before the next one can take place.

Lorin Anderson, a former student of Bloom, and David Krathwohl revisited the cognitive domain in the mid-nineties and made some changes, with perhaps the three most prominent ones being (Anderson, Krathwohl, Airasian, Cruikshank, Mayer, Pintrich, Raths, Wittrock, 2000):
	changing the names in the six categories from noun to verb forms
	rearranging them as shown in the chart below
	creating a processes and levels of knowledge matrix

R, U, App, An, Eval, Cr

<THIS HAS A TABLE OF EXAMPLES>
	HAS RELEVANT KEYWORDS FOR EACH CATEGORY (1D)

Bloom's Revised Taxonomy not only improved the usability of it by using action words, but added a cognitive and knowledge matrix.

While Bloom's original cognitive taxonomy did mention three levels of knowledge or products that could be processed, they were not discussed very much and remained one-dimensional:
	Factual - The basic elements students must know to be acquainted with a discipline or solve problems.
		Knowledge of terminology
		Knowledge of specific details and elements
	Conceptual – The interrelationships among the basic elements within a larger structure that enable them to function together.
		Knowledge of classifications and categories
		Knowledge of principles and generalizations
		Knowledge of theories, models, and structures
	Procedural - How to do something, methods of inquiry, and criteria for using skills, algorithms, techniques, and methods.
		Knowledge of subject-specific skills and algorithms
		Knowledge of subject-specific techniques and methods
		Knowledge of criteria for determining when to use appropriate procedures

In Krathwohl and Anderson's revised version, the authors combine the cognitive processes with the above three levels of knowledge to form a matrix. In addition, they added another level of knowledge - metacognition:
	Metacognitive – Knowledge of cognition in general, as well as awareness and knowledge of one’s own cognition.
		Strategic Knowledge
		Knowledge about cognitive tasks, including appropriate contextual and conditional knowledge
		Self-knowledge

<ONE MORE TABLE OF EXAMPLES>
	HAS RELEVANT KEYWORDS FOR EACH CATEGORY (2D)

Plus references
-------------
http://www.nwlink.com/~donclark/hrd/strategy.html
	Contains suggestions for what can be done in case any particular type of level needs to be worked on
-------------

http://teaching.uncc.edu/learning-resources/articles-books/best-practice/goals-objectives/blooms-educational-objectives
	More examples.... see once and delete if it doesn't seem that useful

-------------

https://tlc.iitm.ac.in/PDF/Blooms%20Tax.pdf
	Contains generic questions structures
	Can be used for training

-------------

http://www.learnnc.org/lp/media/articles/bloom0405-3/bloompix.html
	Simple example with an image
	Will be more memorable for use during a presentation
	But eventually, we might replace these generic examples with subject specific examples

-------------

http://www.edpsycinteractive.org/topics/cognition/bloom.html
	Better examples for the 2D grid

-------------
https://community.articulate.com/articles/blooms-taxonomy-elearning-instructional-design

Let’s take a look at examples of activities you can design for each of the six cognitive skill levels:
	Remembering: examples, lectures, videos, visuals
	Understanding: basic quiz questions (multiple choice, matching, etc.)
	Applying: practical exercises, role-playing games, simulations
	Analyzing: problem-solving questions, case studies
	Evaluating: case studies, critiques, appraisals
	Creating: projects, complex quiz questions (drag and drop, free response, etc.)

Papers on work done - arxiv.org
	1) Used Bloom's taxonomy to assess the impact of some spreadsheet training software
	2) Used it to assess and modify e-Learning of a Computer Science course
	3) Physics question dataset, hand labelled, used Bloom's taxonomy to separate the questions.. then used some Rasch Model
	4) Made a game to learn Software Design principles after targeting particular Bloom's level (useless but possible way to put across an application)

On Which Skills do Indian Universities Evaluate Software Engineering Students?
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1601.01796.pdf
	Uses the keywords to classify. No ML
	Doesn't do multi dimension... multiple tables, one for each dimension
	Results can be used to get a bench mark (possibly useless)

Dynamic Cognitive Process Application of Blooms Taxonomy for Complex Software Design in the Cognitive Domain
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1002.2829.pdf
	Parts of Software Design Process
	And the cognitive levels they belong to (1D)

-------------

Why Use Bloom’s Taxonomy?

The authors of the revised taxonomy suggest a multi-layered answer to this question, to which the author of this teaching guide has added some clarifying points:
	Objectives (learning goals) are important to establish in a pedagogical interchange so that teachers and students alike understand the purpose of that interchange.
	Teachers can benefit from using frameworks to organize objectives because
	Organizing objectives helps to clarify objectives for themselves and for students.
	Having an organized set of objectives helps teachers to:
		“plan and deliver appropriate instruction”;
		“design valid assessment tasks and strategies”;and
		“ensure that instruction and assessment are aligned with the objectives.”

-------------

Criticism of the taxonomy

As Morshead (1965) pointed out on the publication of the second volume, the classification was not a properly constructed taxonomy, as it lacked a systemic rationale of construction.

This was subsequently acknowledged in the discussion of the original taxonomy in its 2000 revision, and the taxonomy was reestablished on more systematic lines. It is generally considered that the role the taxonomy played in systematising a field was more important than any perceived lack of rigour in its construction.

Some critiques of the taxonomy's cognitive domain admit the existence of these six categories, but question the existence of a sequential, hierarchical link. Often, educators view the taxonomy as a hierarchy and dismiss the lowest levels as unworthy of teaching. The learning of the lower levels enables the building of skills in the higher levels of the taxonomy. This scaffolding process is an application of Vygotskian constructivism.

In the 2001 revised edition of Bloom's taxonomy, the levels are:
	R, U, A, A, E, Create (rather than synthesize)

Some consider the three lowest levels as hierarchically ordered, but the three higher levels as parallel. Others say that it is sometimes better to move to Application before introducing concepts, the idea being to create a learning environment where the real world context comes first and the theory second to promote the student's grasp of the phenomenon, concept or event. This thinking would seem to relate to the method of problem-based learning.

Furthermore, the distinction between the categories can be seen as artificial since any given cognitive task may entail a number of processes. It could even be argued that any attempt to nicely categorize cognitive processes into clean, cut-and-dried classifications undermines the holistic, highly connective and interrelated nature of cognition. This is a criticism that can be directed at taxonomies of mental processes in general.

-------------

https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/24/Blooms_rose.svg

Bloom's taxonomy can be used as a teaching tool to help balance assessment and evaluative questions in class, assignments and texts to ensure all orders of thinking are exercised in student's learning, including aspects of information searching.

-------------

http://sites.miis.edu/iemg8542/files/2014/02/Organization-of-Learning.pdf
	Contains nice tables that can be used as feedback forms

-------------

Assessing the quality of a student-generated question repository (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1308.2202.pdf)
	Made students write questions + answers + assessment of the quality
	The act of question writing can be an effective study and learning technique
	Table III. Criteria used to define high quality questions
		Measure					Criteria details
		Taxonomy category		At least level 2 or higher (‘understand’ or above).
		Explanation category	At least level 2 or higher (‘minimal’ or better).
		Clearly worded question	Unambiguous vs. unclear (binary measure).
		Distractors				At least 2 feasible and plausible distractors.
		Correctness				‘Most likely’ correct (binary measure).
		Plagiarism				‘Not obviously’ plagiarized (binary measure).

-------------
* http://www.jatit.org/volumes/Vol78No3/15Vol78No3.pdf
EXAM QUESTIONS CLASSIFICATION BASED ON BLOOM’S TAXONOMY COGNITIVE LEVEL USING CLASSIFIERS COMBINATION

This study proposed a new method to classify exam questions automatically according to the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy by implementing a combination strategy based on voting algorithm that combines three machine learning classifiers. In this work, several classifiers are taken into consideration. The classifiers are, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), and k-Nearest Neighbour (k-NN) that are used to classify the question with or without feature selection methods, namely Chi-Square, Mutual Information and Odd Ratio. Then a combination algorithm is used to integrate the overall strength of the three classifiers (SVM, NB, and k-NN). The classification model achieves highest result through the combination strategy by applying Mutual Information, which proved to be promising and comparable to other similar models. These experiments aimed to efficiently integrate different feature selection methods and classification algorithms to synthesize a classification procedure more accurately.


-------------
